In 2022 nearly half of Americans expected 
a civil war in the next few years,  
one in five now believes political violence 
is justified. And it's not just the US
but around the world. People increasingly 
see themselves as part of opposing teams.
There are many different reasons 
for this, but one gets blamed a lot:  
social media. Social media divides us, 
makes us more extreme and less empathetic,  
it riles us up or sucks us into doom scrolling,  
making us stressed and depressed. It feels like we 
need to touch grass and escape to the real world.
New research shows that we might have 
largely misinterpreted why this is the  
case. It turns out that the social media 
internet may uniquely undermine the way  
our brains work but not in the way you think.
The Myth of the Filter Bubble
You've probably heard about online filter bubbles: 
Algorithms give you exactly what you want, or what  
they think you want. You only see information 
that shows you opinions that agree with yours,  
while dissenting opinions or information are 
filtered out. Since you only see content close to  
your world view, more extreme and toxic opinions 
suddenly seem less extreme. You are trapped in a  
radicalising filter bubble and your view of 
the world becomes narrower and more extreme.
But is that true?
Extreme filter bubbles seem to be rather rare 
Studies that investigated what people actually 
look at online or are shown by search engines,  
found little evidence that you are ideologically 
isolated. It is the exact opposite: Online you  
are constantly confronted with opinions 
and world views that are not your own.
It turns out the place where you are the most 
ideologically isolated is your real life,  
in the real world, with real people. Your 
real world interactions with your friends,  
family, colleagues and neighbors are 
much less diverse than your online  
bubble. The filter bubble exists 
in your real life, not online. 
Ok wait. Online filter bubbles have been 
the prevailing explanation as to why we’ve  
all started hating each other more over the 
last two decades. If that's not the case,  
shouldn’t the internet open our minds and 
make us more empathetic with each other?
Unfortunately your brain is stupid.
Your Brain is Stupid
Human brains didn’t evolve to understand the true 
nature of reality, but to navigate and maintain  
social structures. Our ancestors desperately 
needed each other to survive, so our brains  
had to make sure we cooperated. That's why social 
isolation or exclusion feels so horrible, because  
it was actually life threatening. A tribe that 
worked together survived, a divided tribe died.
The way communities worked for 
thousands of years is that, sure,  
you may have disliked a neighbour, but because 
you lived close to each other, you also rooted  
for the same sports club or saw them at the
church. You both thought that the people from  
the other village were idiots. Being physically 
close made you familiar and created similarities  
that bridged the gap of different world views so 
you didn’t murder each other. And your world view  
was probably not that different in the first place 
because it was formed by the same local culture.
When our brains evolved, this was enough. Whoever 
was around, was similar to us. We liked what was  
similar to us – this kept us aligned enough 
to work together despite our differences. 
As humanity moved on from small tribes to towns 
and cities, from chiefdoms to kingdoms to nations,  
our brains and our communities had to adapt to 
more diverse sets of neighbours. We began to meet  
on the town square or in universities 
where we argued and screamed at each  
other – but in the grand scheme of things 
communities were still relatively isolated,  
we were still pretty similar and 
aligned with the people around us.
Conflict and disagreement are not 
a bad thing per se. Tension over  
how we should live can create new 
and wonderful things. Our values,  
norms and taboos are always evolving 
and whatever we think is normal today,  
will not be normal in the future. But we also 
need social glue to hold our societies together,  
because our brains don’t care about the meta 
level of humanity but about being safe in a tribe.
Until about 20 years ago 
we did something truly new,  
that hit our brains like a freight train: the 
social media internet, the digital town square.
Don’t You Dare Disagree With Me – Social Sorting
In a nutshell: Our brains are not able 
to process the amount of disagreement we  
encounter on the social internet. The very 
mechanisms that made it possible for our  
ancestors to work together in the first place 
are derailed in ways we were not prepared for.
Whether you want it to or not, your brain 
sorts people by world views and opinions,  
into teams. This is not simply tribalism,  
it goes further. Researchers have 
called this process social sorting.
On the digital town square you encounter people 
that express opinions or share information  
that clash with your worldview. But unlike your 
neighbour, they don't root for your local sports  
club. You are missing the local social glue your 
brain needs to align with them. For your brain,  
the disagreement between yourself and them 
becomes a central part of their identity. 
And this makes it less likely that 
you will seriously consider their  
position or opinion in the future. 
If you hear bad things about them,  
your brain is much more likely 
to believe it uncritically.
On the flipside, there are people who 
share your world view and are maybe  
even more similar to you than many people 
in your real life. Which makes your brain  
like them a lot and kind of hyper align with 
them. People who think like you are probably  
good people because you are a good person and 
whatever social group you belong to is good!  
So your brain is more likely to believe their 
opinions. If you hear bad things about them,  
your brain is much more likely 
to dismiss it uncritically.
The engagement driven social internet makes it 
worse because it wants to keep you online as  
long as possible. And the most engaging emotion 
is, unfortunately: Anger. The more angry you get,  
the more likely you are to share and engage, 
and this leads to social media amplifying the  
most extreme and controversial opinions. It 
optimises not only to show us disagreement,  
but the worst disagreement possible. And because 
your stupid brain is sorting people into teams,  
whatever the worst opinions are, it assigns the 
same opinions to everybody on the other team.
What is striking and new about online polarisation 
is that all the aspects of our lives that make  
us individuals, our lifestyle choices, the 
comedians or shows we watch, our religion,  
sense of fashion and so on are condensed, 
making it seem that they are parts of  
opposing and mutually exclusive identities.
This simplifies and distorts disagreements
about how we should run society so much that 
it often seems as if the people on the other  
team are actively, willfully making the 
world worse. That they are almost evil,  
beyond convincing with rationality, facts or civil 
discussion. While you are of course on the correct  
team, it may be hard to process that you may 
seem like that to people on the other team.
On a societal level this is dissolving the 
social glue that is the foundation of our  
democracies. If we think our neighbours 
are evil, how can we live together?
This is especially bad in the US, where the 
two party system makes it extra easy to think  
of people in terms of teams – negative opinion 
about the other party has reached record highs.
Ok. Is there something we can learn 
from this? Is there something we can do?
Something more positive – Opinion Part
In the end, It is important to be 
aware of what social media does to  
your brain. It's easier to change 
yourself than to change the world,  
so you can self examine why you believe the 
things you believe and whether you dismiss  
or believe information based on who the 
person is who is stating that information.
The internet comes with a lot of 
ups and downs and just like we  
had to adapt from living in small tribes 
to living in cities, we need to adapt to  
the information age where we have access to 
billions of people. Evolution is too slow,  
so we need to find models that work with 
what our brains are able to tolerate.
One model that seemed to work well was the pre 
social media internet old people might remember:
Bulletin boards, forums, blogs. The 
main difference to today was twofold:  
For one there were no algorithms fighting to 
keep you online at anycost – at some point  
you were done with the internet for the 
day, as mind blowing as this may sound.
But more importantly: The old internet 
was very fractured, split into thousands  
of different communities, like small villages 
gathering around shared beliefs and interests.  
These villages were separated from each 
other by digital rivers or mountains.
These communities worked because they mirrored 
real life much more than social media:  
Each village had its own culture and set of rules. 
Maybe one community was into rough humour and soft  
moderation, another had strict rules and banned 
easily. If you didn’t play by the village rules,  
you would be banned – or you could just go and 
move to another village that suited you better.
So instead of all of us gathering in one 
place, overwhelming our brains at a town  
square that in the end just leads to us 
going insane, one solution to achieve less  
social sorting may be extremely simple: 
go back to smaller online communities.
Because what our stupid brains don’t realize 
is that we are actually all on the same team:  
Humanity, on a wet rock speeding through space 
in a universe that doesn’t think about us.  
We are all in this together – but until our 
brains adjust to being able to deal with that,  
we might be better off being a tiny bit separated.
One of the worst things about the media we 
consume is that most news organizations tend  
to cater to one team, making you 
feel you are on the correct side. 
Ground News, the sponsor of this video, is 
trying to make these biases more transparent  
by giving you tools that help you think 
critically about the information you  
consume – a mission we wholeheartedly 
support. Ground News gathers related  
articles from around the world in one 
place so you can compare how different  
outlets and sides cover them. They provide 
context about the source of the information,  
if they have a political bias, how reliable 
their reporting is and who owns them.
This makes the news less stressful and makes you 
understand the world much better. If you want to  
check them out go to ground got news slash 
nutshell. If you sign up through this link,  
you’ll get 30% off their unlimited access 
plan. A subscription supports Kurzgesagt  
and Ground News, so they can continue 
to build more media literacy tools.
Our favorite tool has a personal background: 
in 2018 kurzgesagt founder Philipp, who wrote  
this video, was going through chemotherapy 
and was intensely bored – so he ended up  
reading all the big German newspapers, 
even the ones he hated, front to back,  
every single day. Aside from the obvious biases, 
what was the most shocking were the stories  
each side did not talk about. Both sides ignored 
things that are inconvenient to their world views.
The Ground News Blind spot feed highlights this 
exact thing - showing you news stories that are  
heavily covered by one side of the political 
spectrum and ignored by the other. So check  
them out at ground.news/nutshell 
to make sure you’re seeing the full picture.
The universe today is happy and healthy, 
 with exciting things going on.
But at some point the night will turn 
dark. Everything that once was 
will peacefully sleep forever. But what 
is the last thing that will ever happen  
and when will it be? It turns out there 
is such a thing and you probably haven’t  
heard about it. Let's travel to the end of 
the universe and look at the last thing.
After a messy birth our universe was a sleepy 
baby, warm and dark, filled with swirling clouds  
of hot hydrogen and helium. The story of creation 
is a story of this gas and where it will end up.
Shortly after, the universe got busy making 
the first generation of stars. They were  
massive and lived violent lives, forging new 
elements, only to release most of them when  
they blew up. Countless stars were born and 
refined the gas available in the universe,  
cycling matter around, each generation giving 
most of its gas and fresh elements to the next.
But not all gas is returned. Every time a 
new generation of stars forms, they also  
make more and more red dwarfs that burn slowly 
and live for trillions of years. When they die,  
they don’t give their gas back to the universe 
but turn into white dwarfs. So red dwarfs lock  
up more gas forever. Some more gas is locked 
forever in other remains of dead stars:  
neutron stars and black holes. Which is bad, as 
it reduces the material available for new stars.
Today the universe is a great 
home for us and will remain so  
for billions of years. But most of 
the gas has been used up or trapped.  
Over 90% of the stars that will 
ever be born have been born already.
To get to the last thing to ever happen, 
all other things need to happen first.
The next few hundred billion years 
will be fun and a great time for  
galactic exploration – but step by 
step, large stars and stars like  
our sun will die out. Eventually almost all 
the stars will be red dwarfs slowly dying.
The End of Everything – but not quite
In a few trillion years the 
cosmic gas will finally have  
run out. About 88% of the mass of 
every galaxy will be white dwarfs,  
2% neutron stars and black holes, and about 
10% gas giants and sad brown dwarf losers.
White dwarfs are the corpses of old stars, not 
much bigger than earth but on average as massive  
as half our sun, some even much more. This makes 
them the third densest objects in the universe,  
after neutron stars and black holes. 
About a 1,000,000 times denser than  
the sun today. Since they used to be active 
stars, their surface can be as hot as 150,000  
degrees. White dwarfs are dim, hot, dense 
spheres that don’t do anything anymore.
But eventually even white dwarfs will die because 
they are slowly losing their heat – it takes at  
least 10 trillion years, more than 700 times 
longer than the current age of the universe.  
As they do their cooling down, the universe 
around them will irreversibly grow dark,  
as more and more white dwarfs burn 
out, and turn into dead husks:  
black dwarfs. Spheres of death, as cold as space 
itself, invisible against the dark backdrop.
Over trillions and trillions of years,  
every object in every galaxy is 
eventually either ejected into  
the void or its orbit decays and it will fall 
into the central black hole and be destroyed.
In about a quintillion years, all galaxies 
have evaporated and every object is on its own,  
in the center of its own observable universe, 
emptiness as far as can be seen in any direction,  
traveling through black nothingness. 
Still, there are things that will happen.
Black holes are dying. Slowly. They’ll fizzle 
away by emitting Hawking radiation until they  
are so small that they die in a final flash 
of light. This will take about a googol years,  
10 to the power of 100 years, until the last 
super massive black hole dies. A number so absurd,  
there is nothing to compare it to. 
Maybe some living beings could have  
survived around black holes – but even 
this science fiction option ends now.
After this unsettling amount of time we are not 
even close to the end. Now is the time of the  
black dwarfs. It turns out there is some weird 
physics going on inside the dead husk of stars!
The Weird Physics of Black Dwarfs
A black dwarf is a sphere the size of earth, 
as massive as a star but almost as cold as  
absolute zero. Stars stay alive because 
their intense heat in their cores – so  
why do black dwarfs not collapse into 
a black hole? What keeps them together?
Deep inside a black dwarf, matter is squeezed 
to densities millions of times greater than  
anything we see on earth. The pressure is so great 
that electrons can’t combine with nuclei to form  
atoms. Instead matter is weird, degenerate: the 
nuclei are compressed by the weight of the star,  
locked into a rigid lattice, while the 
electrons form a plasma between them.
And these electrons hold the star 
together. We are simplifying,  
but imagine matter as a subway train 
and electrons as passengers. If there  
are empty seats passengers spread out because 
they care a lot about their personal space.
But as a black dwarf is so incredibly 
dense, this is like squishing more and  
more passengers into our train. Gravity 
is pushing in, trying to collapse it. The  
Passengers are forced to sit and stand 
close together, which they hate. And so  
the passengers, our electrons try to push 
out against gravity as hard as they can.
This way the electrons that are having a horrible 
time in the crowded train that is the black dwarf,  
hold up the star. Everything else in 
the universe may have crumbled already,  
these tiny particles push against each other 
until the end of time. Or they would – if 
quantum mechanics didn’t ruin everything.
Simplifying a lot: when particles get close 
enough, sometimes they can jump at each other  
and fuse together. A process called ‘quantum 
tunneling’. This happens constantly in stars  
because of their intense heat. It is one of the 
key reasons stars can fuse elements into new  
ones. But it also happens at a temperature near 
absolute zero. Just, well, mind numbingly slowly.
This is the final step to creating the last 
interesting thing to ever happen in our universe.
Here, in this lone black dwarf something fantastic 
occurs. Nothing happens for a trillion years.  
Nothing at all. Can you imagine that? But 
then! A single fusion reaction: two carbon  
nuclei combine by quantum tunneling to become 
magnesium! Another 100 trillion years pass. It  
happens again! Then nothing for another bazillion 
years. Oh! Two oxygen nuclei combine into silicon!
As eons pass, the nuclei in the frozen black 
dwarf slowly combine. Making new heavier  
nuclei. And these take even longer to fuse, 
but given enough time they eventually will.
Remember the breathtaking amount of time 
it took for a supermassive black hole to  
evaporate? That's a brief moment in 
comparison to what's going on here.
The difference between a second and 
trillions of years has lost all meaning.  
Over a time so absurd that it has no name, 
nuclei keep fusing into heavier elements.
Until, when silicon nuclei fuse, they 
form Nickel-56. Nickel-56 is radioactive,  
which means it is unstable. And when it 
eventually decays and turns into iron,  
it emits two positrons – antimatter electrons.
And these two positrons,  
find two electrons and annihilate them 
and themselves. Which is a problem.
Remember how the uncomfortable electrons 
produce the pressure to hold the star  
together? Destroying the electron means 
fewer friends to help them hold up the  
star. Losing an electron does not give 
them more space to scratch their butts,  
it just makes gravity squeeze harder, the 
walls closing in on those that remain.
In the case of the most massive black 
dwarfs this is catastrophic. Bit by bit,  
the black dwarf turns into a sphere of 
iron, and more electrons are annihilated.
For at least 10^1000 years – almost, 
but not quite forever – there is  
no visible change in the entire universe.
And then, finally, the last thing to ever  
happen happens. The black dwarf has lost 
one too many electrons. It can no longer  
support its immense mass and goes into 
an uncontrolled collapse - a supernova.
It first implodes and then explodes 
as bright as a galaxy and fills the  
empty universe with light again! A beautiful 
moment nobody will get to enjoy. And then,  
as quickly as it began, it's all over.
Darkness again, emptiness.
That was the last thing that will ever happen. 
The universe may now be truly dead.
But don’t be bummed out about it. This is so far 
away in the future that “forever” hardly describes it.
Today the universe is the best place it 
could be for us. And you can sleep tight tonight,  
knowing the last interesting thing that 
will ever happen is forever long away.
For now, there are still plenty of interesting 
things to discover - and the younger you start  
discovering, the more you will understand 
about the world we live in. Our sponsor  
KiwiCo helps kids get a headstart there
 with a range of unique crates on a  
myriad of STEM topics, covering science, 
technology, engineering, arts and math.
Every crate is like a little adventure 
in a box. Imagine the excitement of a  
trip to the museum or an amazing theme 
park – but delivered to your doorstep,  
with everything you need neatly packed inside.
There are different lines designed for kids  
of all ages and interests so 
there’s something for everyone.
Like us, KiwiCo spends a ridiculous amount of 
time on fine tuning each crate - every one of  
their 2000 available projects took more than 
one thousand hours to develop by experts and  
is tested by kids. We really liked the 
KiwiCo Tinker crate line which gives  
you a hands-on engineering project with 
all of the educational and instructional  
information you need to complete the project 
at home – we might also have decided to just  
keep some of them around the office and 
not hand the extras to any kids we know.
If you want to try out KiwiCo and get the best 
deal, click on the link in the infobox or use  
the code KURZGESAGT to get 50% off your first 
month. Or if you want to try it out first,  
they also offer individual crates in 
the KiwiCo Store. At kurzgesagt we  
love to spark curiosity – and we love to work
with companies that share this goal.
be prepared to make contact our new
limited drop has landed only on the kot
kazak
shop could Aliens destroy us from light
years away H another day at the kazak
labs where we answer the most important
questions with science today how might
civilizations wage war across light
years what kind of devastating weapons
could they use and what would they look
like meet our two players a yellow dwarf
star system home to a species of
primates humans as they call themselves
recently became a technological
civilization they have Rockets nuclear
reactors and memes how
cute the Scorpions disagree they reside
on a planet around the orange dwarf star
HD
4307 42 light years away sorion
civilization developed earlier than
humans and they have much better
technology they've recently built a
Dyson swarm around their star which
gives them near Limitless energy and
they noticed Humanity which is
unfortunate as the Scorpions are
planning a hyperspace bypass through our
solar system so they decided that
Humanity has to go Interstellar war is
hard though front lines tactics and
Logistics are meaningless at these
scales it's also fought across time
decades will pass between firing a
weapon and learning whether it hit or
not sending an invasion Fleet is futile
even if the Scorpions travel at a large
fraction of the speed of light the
journey to Earth would take decades or
even centuries and humans would have
plenty of time to prepare if you want to
learn more about the mind-numbing
problem of war between alien
civilizations we made a video about it
today we'll help the Scorpions construct
a weapon that is not only extremely long
range and as fast as physically possible
but that will totally destroy everything
on Earth so no human survivors will come
to enact Vengeance on small in the
future in interstellar War you want to
win with one shot our bird scientists
have found three sorion designs the star
laser the relativistic missile and the
ultra relativistic Electron Beam all
based on real technologies that humans
are using in some form already let's see
how they
work the star laser as an advanced
technological civilization the Scorpions
harness the energy of their Star by
surrounding it with billions of solar
power satellites this Dyson swarm
collects 1% of the star's energy output
a million billion billion Watts 50
billion times more than all Humanity
generates what if all the power of the
Dyson swarm all those satellites were
used to create a star laser like any
laser the bigger it is the longer its
range human built lasers use small
mirrors to focus so they have short
ranges the Scorpions could turn their
entire Dyson swarm into a collective
focusing element a million kilm wide the
star laser has an insane range as a
result enough to focus on target Earth
from a distance of over 2 million light
years okay let's shoot
it countless tiny beams combine into a
single huge beam laser beams are
normally invisible in space but the star
laser is so powerful that light
scattering off bits of dust and gas in
its path makes it clearly visible in the
sky a gigantic column of green light the
laser travels at the speed of light
which oddly enough is still pretty slow
on a galactic level it takes a whole day
until the laser has left the sorion
system shooting into the emptiness
between Stars it will travel for decades
occasionally melting the odd bit of
Interstellar dust or
asteroid 42 years after being fired it
arrives without warning humans only
notice a weird green glow in the sky and
then they're gone 1% of the energy of a
star concentrated into a beam the
diameter of Earth traveling 42 light
years it burns the exposed half of the
planet with the intensity of 3 million
Suns the Seas boil and evaporate fires
scour the land and within minutes
Earth's crust begins to melt into a sea
of lava as the planet rotates it turns
into a red hot hell with no trace of
life after a day it's all over and the
laser dies down in another 42 years the
Scorpion will know if they've been
successful
that's another thing about Interstellar
War when you attack your grandchildren
will be the ones to find out if you won
it's like all the bombs from World War
II exploding in the 80s and us only
seeing the effect today okay the star
lasers extreme range speed of light
attack and ability to melt down any
Target make it a premier Interstellar
weapon but is there something
else the relativistic
missile What If instead of converting
the energy of their Dyson swarm into a
laser the Scorpions used it to shoot a
super bullet a relativistic missile
going as close to the speed of light as
possible this sort of weapon is at the
limits of what the sorion technology can
handle as it requires loads of a highly
dangerous material antimatter the evil
twin of regular matter humans have only
managed to produce a few nanograms of
antimatter with their unlimited energy
scorpions can manufacture it at an
industrial scale to build anti matter
Rockets when antimatter and matter are
mixed they annihilate which in more
practical terms means there's a big big
boom releasing gamma rays and plasma the
physics is complicated but basically if
you have a really strong magnetic field
you can deflect the plasma through a
nozzle just like in the chemical Rockets
humans use but it would be much much
faster the fastest rocket possibly
basically our relativistic missile is
much bigger than a skyscraper at the
bottom is the bell-shaped magnetic
nozzle 100 m wide on top of it are 250
floors filled with antimatter and matter
ready to annihilate each other on the
top floor is a 300 kg projectile looking
quite small about the size of a person
to stop them getting damaged on the way
the missiles have dozens of sacrificial
layers that form a Whipple Shield to
make sure they do their job the sorion
build 1,000
missiles let's fire them launching all
the relativist missiles is a spectacular
event for a moment the antimatter
engines lighting up outshine their star
their exhaust is a long trail of
brilliant white and as they accelerate
away they appear redder and redder until
they turn invisible with the extreme
amount of energy released by the matter
antimatter reactions the missiles are
accelerated to
99.999999% of the speed of light they
have effectively infinite range as
there's nothing really to slow them down
they arrive shortly after you can see
them the light from their launch will
take 42 years to reach Earth so human
astronomers might see the flash of the
missile's launch and then a few days
later they'll hit not enough time to
prepare each relativistic missile packs
the kinetic energy of a dinosaur killer
asteroid so only one needs to hit they
never reach the ground disintegrating
Instead at the edge of Earth's
atmosphere intense blue flashes set
everything on fire
then continents sized Fireballs slam
down on the surface to smash everything
into dust repeatedly until nothing is
left but rubble and smoke so
Interstellar missiles with unlimited
range minimal warning and delivering
complete destruction of a planet's
surface nice but they are a hassle to
build is there something else
maybe the ultra relativistic Electron
Beam humans do funny things to their
food to rid it of bacteria and make it
safe to eat like shooting electron beams
at strawberries small particle
accelerators send electrons into the
food with an energy similar to the
radiation from nuclear reactions not
enough to burn the food but deadly to
bacteria sorion had the same idea but
bigger the main challenge with an
electron beam is range electrons are
negatively charged particles so they
don't want to stay near each other a
regular Electron Beam will quickly
spread out making it harmless small
scorpion need it to cover distances of
dozens of light years so they've used
the rules of the universe to trick the
electrons by building an ultra
relativistic Electron Beam or Europe
what it does is accelerate the electrons
to
99.99999
99999
9999999999
99999 98% of the speed of
light faster than even the most powerful
Cosmic r
the closer something travels to the
speed of light the slower time moves for
it relative to the rest of the universe
and since these electrons are moving so
incredibly fast for every second of
spreading their experience over 5
million years pass in real time a
physics trick that lets the beam cross
Interstellar distances while remaining
tightly focused on its Target the
biggest particle accelerator on Earth is
27 km long the sorion need one that's
over 100,000 km long a mega structure 8
times longer than Earth is wide it's
mostly a tube of magnets holding the
beam together until the exit like a long
trumpet of Doom surrounded by an aura of
deadly radiation when it's fired it
produces a ruler straight lightning bolt
pointed at Earth its effects on a rival
are less visible than the other weapons
no flashes of light no massive
firestorms no explosions it doesn't
destroy rocks it destroys DNA people get
dizzy Then Fall sick as their cells are
pierced by radiation you might think
that a deep bunker could save a few
humans but no the urub is so penetrating
that its effects accumulate to lethal
doses even underground over days or
weeks in the end just like our
strawberries Earth becomes
sterile simulation results H another
elaborate animated science explainer by
cotzal where we've learned a lot not
sure exactly what
luckily the morpion don't really exist
but others might one major downside of
all our weapons is that others around
the Milky Way could see you firing them
which is not ideal because you don't
want to present yourself as a dangerous
species and tell everybody where exactly
you are so maybe instead of shouting or
shooting out into the universe the best
course of action seems to be to stay
relatively quiet for now and observe
maybe one day we'll witness distant
Stars shooting at each other and be glad
we stayed out of
it but we don't have to stay out of
Intergalactic fun there's a peaceful way
to join typ two civilizations on their
Galactic Adventures look it's the
galactic Club a Cozy Corner in the vast
Universe reserved for friendly quirky
folk like you come in and don't worry
we've got everything you need to fit
right in it's all part of our latest
limited drop kill your alien friends
with kindness and impress them with
these colorful patches sweaters wear
these new iconic t-shirts that represent
your love of stargazing and show
allegiance to our ultimate Overlord deck
and the star of the show a woven space
blanket to wrap yourself and your new
alien bues in maybe the coolest thing
we've ever created definitely the
largest like with our last limited drop
these items are available now until they
sell out and then never again pair them
up with the 12,24 cosmic Creations can
to have a beautiful daily reminder of
potential alien civilizations and a way
to make plans with all your new Pals all
of our products are designed and
produced with love and care by us here
at KAG they are an integral part of the
science story we try to tell so start
your journey on our Channel and continue
it with our posters calendars and
plushes every purchase directly funds
what we do on this channel thank you so
much for your support join the galactic
club now Overlord duck is wai
[Music]
wait
Earth is 4.5 billion years old – impossible
for your brain to truly grasp, so here is an experiment:
every second around 1.5 million years 
will pass – you're on a musical train ride 
looking out the window, passing all of
Earth's History in an hour.
Watch the eons pass and experience
how long a billion years really is.
You can have this in the background, study
with it or just enjoy the ride.
From time to time, I’ll say a few words.
4.5 billion years ago, right after it was
born, Earth was a hell of lava…
Pretty early in its history, Earth collides
with a Mars sized object called Theia,
which forms the moon that you now see in the sky.
Right now it looks huge in the night sky and
will slowly shrink over hundreds of millions
of years as it orbits further away.
4.5 Billion Years Ago we are in the first eon of our planet, the Hadean, named after the greek god of the underworld.
At this point the Atmosphere is mostly CO2
and the floor is lava.
This area of earth's history is mostly invisible
to us because almost none of it is left.
90 million years have passed. 
We are still in the lava hell phase.
Settle in, this will take a while.
Although you wouldn't think it, we found 
minerals called zircons that indicate
there may have been some 
water around at this time.
During this period of the young solar system,
Earth and the inner solar system are smashed
by a constant heavy asteroid bombardment,
for several hundred million years.
At this point in time, our Sun is 30% less
bright than it is today but there are so many
greenhouse gases that it's 
still much hot and comfy.
Around this time we think
life begins to enter the stage.
Only a few hundred million years after the
beginning of everything the first cells begin
spreading over our still very deadly planet.
Earth continues to cool and it probably 
rains for millions of years
as our oceans begin to form, covering 
the still young planet with water.
These hydrothermal vents we're looking at,
and where hot minerals emerge, may have been
the place where life first developed, 
but we dont know.
So much time has passed and we are entering
the Paleoarchean.
Most of Earth is still underwater while the
first supercontinents are in the making
in the depths below.
Its days are shorter since the 
young Earth spins faster.
Good job if you are still watching.
You witnessed a billion years so far.
From this time in history we still have Stromatolites,
sedimentary rocks built by microorganisms.
Among our first real evidence of life on Earth.
Also life is starting to eat the sun – photosynthesis
might have started as early as around here.
3.2 Billion Years Ago in the Mesoarchean the
era of continents begins.
Tectonic plates begin to crush into each other,
pulling and pushing some deep into the earth
where they dissolve.
The basis for our continents today.
The oceans are as hot as a hottub, over 40°C
and microbes are expanding everywhere.
We don't have plants yet to consume greenhouse
gases, so it is really, really hot.
You would basically die immediately 
in this atmosphere.
Also there is no oxygen
in the atmosphere yet.
2.8 Billion Years Ago the Neoarchean begins.
Earth is still a terribly hostile place but
because we finally have proper plate tectonics,
more chemicals are mixed in from inside the
earth and life can use them to make new things!
Some time around here Prokaryotes like bacteria
begin colonizing the planet.
Life diversifies more and more.
But still, after so much time, 
we only have single cells.
2.5 Billion Years Ago in the Siderian, 
a massive event is about to begin
that will change the planet forever:
The Great Oxidation Event.
Oxygen, burped out by cyanobacteria reaches
the atmosphere in large quantities,
paving the way for more complex life.
All the new oxygen in the air reacts with
methane and forms CO2 and Water,
which rapidly cools the planet down.
Probably for the first time ever, the planet
freezes over and a period of multiple
ice ages begins lasting millions of years.
2.3 Billion Years Ago the Rhyacian begins.
Lots of volcanos heat up earth and 
earth unfreezes slowly again.
Melting ice flushes toxic elements into the
oceans but life quietly puts up resistance
and keeps evolving.
Some time 2.05 Billion Years Ago in the Orosirian
a large asteroid hits earth and creates the
largest verified impact structure on Earth.
All over Earth great mountain ranges are 
crushed into existence by early continents
with wild names like Ur, Nena or Atlantica.
1.8 Billion Years Ago in the Statherian 
the supercontinent Columbia has formed.
And a natural, self sustaining
nuclear reactor awakes,
just from scattered uranium
deposits in the ground.
1.6 billion years ago, around the edge of
Calimmian, + or - a few hundred million years or so,
the first Eukaryotic cells, cells with
a nucleus, merge from two other cells.
One of the most important 
moments in the history of life.
But yes, kind of looks not that impressive.
Still, life is only cells.
Earth's crust thickens and heavy continents
form, the oceans become shallower.
Also the first fungi-like organisms extent
their tubular arms and do fungi things.
Some time in the Ectasian 1.4 Billion Years
Ago, Earths inner core is forming.
Weird, right? Feels like it should be older.
But around here it begins to solidify into
a iron crystal surrounded by hot liquid metal.
It will only grow from now on.
1.2 Billion Years Ago in the Stenian not that
much is going on.
Except, the algae Bangiomorpha 
pubescens might have invented sex.
A big reproductive improvement 
for many different reasons.
1 Billion Years Ago the Tonian begins, another
age where Earth is rocks and puddles and oceans.
Life is still invisible to the naked eye.
It does feel different to 
witness it like that, right?
Not everybody is having a great time here.
We have evidence of the first unicellular
predators emerging around that time.
The dominance of bacteria ends and big boy
eukaryotes plant their flags in the oceans.
An arms race between microbes begins that
again creates huge diversity.
Some even invent tiny armour.
720 Million Years Ago in the Cryogenian 
Earth freezes over again.
Sure why not.
How did life survive?
We are not sure.
635 Million Years Ago the supercontinent 
Gondwana forms.
A lot of it is still left today!
Wow! What's happening?
Suddenly life gets big!
In a hot second multicellular 
organisms become widespread!
It's all strange aliens still, but can you
imagine that it took that long for this to happen?
539 Million Years Ago the 
Cambrian explosion begins.
We see life bursting with variety.
Ancestors of almost all of today's major animal
groups appear here while the plants start
to discover the land.
Life is finally exciting!
But of course a big mass extinction happens
right after, killing most species in the ocean.
Plants spread over the planet and create the
soil on the ground and change the atmosphere
by eating CO2.
Things escalate.
Flora and fauna adapt better 
and better to life on land.
We get trees and forrests, fish and the 
first vertebrate decide this land thing
is something they need to try out!
359 Million Years Ago in the Carboniferous
forests and lush marshlands are at their peak.
They will turn into the coal humanity burns
today to keep ourselves warm.
Its all so fast now!
Life changes so quickly
in geological timeframes!
Some 299 Million Years Ago in the Permian,
Pangea, the last supercontinent has formed.
And after a few tens of million years, the
largest mass extinction in history happens,
killing the majority of all species.
Thanks volcanoes.
252 Million Years Ago the Triassic begins.
Oh hey, a dinosaur!
We are now truly in the age of reptiles.
Dinosaurs are everywhere!
The ancestors of the birds do bird things.
Life, uhh, finds a way!
Earth gets more and more familiar.
Such a paradise.
Life is thriving.
Nothing can go wrong... wait, what's that?
And an asteroid killed the dinosaurs and 
most species on Earth.
Such a bummer.
66 Million Years Ago in the Paleogene
the continents look roughly the same as today
and mammals take over.
It is our time now!
We are almost home.
Don't blink or you might miss 
all of human history!
And that was it.
Earth is ancient.
We are new.
So new.
This was a project born of passion.
We've worked on this video on and off since
2019 and as you can imagine, it took forever to make.
But we did we finished it in time
for our tenth10 year anniversary.
If you want to support experimental videos
like this one please like, share and subscribe
and press the bell.
You can also continue your journey through
time with our new Timeline of Evolution poster.
Discover how long it took for the first cellular
blobs to evolve into fishes, then into dinosaurs,
and finally into mammals – and encounter
amazing creatures you've never heard of along the way.
This poster is part of our Education Edition.
A poster series that brings complex topics
to life through extensive research and
elaborate illustrations.
It’s perfect for teachers, students, 
and science lovers.
Get them from our shop and support what we
do on this channel.
In any case, if you got this far,
thank you so much!
Hope you felt something watching this.
It’s time. Let’s reveal the 12,024 Human 
Era Calendar with a big bang! The kurzgesagt  
calendar is special because we are adding 
10,000 years, to include all of humanity  
no matter their culture or origin.
12,000 years ago humans first started  
working together on a larger scale, laying the 
foundation for civilization and the future of  
us all. A much better representation 
of how far our species has come!
This year we’re taking a look at the 
cosmos and all the possible life that  
could be thriving in myriads of worlds – 
hosting radically different animals and  
beings from the ones on earth.
Where in the universe might  
life exist? And how would different cosmic 
environments affect the basic rules of life?
Join us in 12,024 and find out!
Explore strange cosmic habitats and  
extraterrestrial life forms on 12 awe-inspiring 
pages. There is also lots of room for you to  
keep track of your life here on Earth.
Add some serious space magnificence  
to your home but be careful – the 
extremely radiant cover may blind you.
Get the calendar now before it 
sells out. We also have bundles  
and special calendar deals with 
some of your favorite products.
Thank you so much to all of the thousands 
of birbs who get the calendar every year.  
With every purchase you support 
the kurzgesagt vision of sparking  
curiosity and inspiring people all around 
the world. We wish you an epic year 12,024!
The 12,024 Calendar is here!
Get it now before it sells out.
And stay tuned until the end of this video for 
a sneak peek that’s out of this world.
Life has existed on one planet for about 4
billion years, as far as we know. But it might
have started right after the Big Bang, when
the universe was much stranger and more fantastic
than today. A universe that might have allowed
life to develop absolutely anywhere. The cosmos
might be full of the seeds of life, sleeping
in a dead desert, waiting for a few drops
of rain to explosively bloom and grow. Tiny
and not so tiny aliens might be everywhere.
In this video we are going to put together
two highly speculative yet scientifically
grounded possibilities – check out the scientific
papers in our sources. To properly explain it
let's first look at the paradox of life
on Earth.
The Life Paradox
For its first few hundred million years,
Earth was a magma hell constantly 
bombarded by asteroids.
But basically the second things calmed down
and the first oceans formed, life just appeared
and zillions of microbes settled every 
nook and cranny they found.
This is kind of strange – life on Earth
seems to be almost as old as the planet itself.
As if it was waiting around for an opportunity.
But life didn’t only appear extremely quickly:
in that tiny time window, 
it also crossed a huge gap.
To qualify as living things, even microbes
need to eat, poop, grow and multiply.
To do that, they need a genome, 
the biological instruction manual
that sets the inner workings of an organism.
How dead things with no genome became living
things with genomes is one of the biggest
riddles of science. Simplifying a lot, the
problem is that to have a functioning genome
you need proteins, and to make those proteins
you need a functioning genome. Both proteins
and genomes are super long molecules 
made of pretty complex blocks
that are extremely difficult 
to assemble by chance.
It is a chicken-egg paradox 
with several chickens and eggs.
Once you have a finished cell, the whole system
works efficiently. But starting from simple
dead stuff and reaching 
that level of sophistication 
by pure chance should require an amazing amount
of time for trial and error. So how did the
first living things manage to cross that gap
in just a few hundred million years?
Most theories about the origin of life try
to explain that gap by theorizing how some
primitive soup of prebiotic molecules
could have efficiently produced 
the first self replicating entities.
But we still don’t know how exactly
this would have worked.
Maybe we need to think backwards.
The Clock of Evolution
Think of genomes as a book telling the history
of life. As time passed and life evolved,
more characters were introduced: Amoebae,
fish, amphibians, dinosaurs and mammals.
Over billions of years, the story 
of lifegot more and more complex.
A genome can be viewed as a long string 
of letters with biological instructions.
And from microbes to us today, functional 
genomes seem to have been increasing in size
at a fairly constant rate. 
The functional genome of fish is more than twice
that of worms; our functional genome is about
twice bigger than that of fish and so on.
It is a bit more complicated, but for now
let’s run with this.
When we put all these clues together,
it seems that genomes have been doubling in
size on average every 350 million years or
so. As if evolution had been following an
exponential inner clock. 
But it gets even stranger.
The very first microbes that emerged on Earth,
even if they look simple, already seem to
have had pretty long and complex genomes.
But how could life have achieved that level
of complexity in such a short time?
There may be an interesting way to solve this
riddle: We just take our exponential clock
and extrapolate it back in time, to the simplest
conceivable life form – something equivalent
to a being with a genome containing just a
few letters. But if we do that we end up
10 billion years in the past. More than twice
the age of Earth, which means: If life actually
evolved like this, it did not start here,
but somewhere out there, in space.
This would explain why life started to thrive
so quickly on our young planet. If it was
already present in space like a seed, it just
needed water and warm temperatures to wake
up and go on evolving. And it would also explain
the high degree of sophistication of the first
life forms on Earth. They could have been
complex already because they might have been
evolving for billions of years 
somewhere else in the universe.
But could life really be that old? Maybe yes.
Actually, life could have started shortly
after the universe itself was born.
A Goldilocks Baby Universe
At its most basic level life needs two things:
the right chemical elements to form complex
molecules and a liquid medium like water,
in which those molecules can move and interact.
The liquid medium needs to stay warm enough
to remain, well, liquid.
So when we search for life in space, we focus
on Earth-like planets at just the right distance
from their star – warm enough to sustain
liquid water.
But there was actually a time when almost
all of the universe might have been habitable.
Right after the Big Bang the universe was
extremely hot. But as the cosmos expanded,
it cooled. And between about 10 and 17 million
years after the Big Bang, when the universe
was a thousand times younger than today, it
was between 100 ºC and 0 ºC – the temperature
at which water is liquid. So for this window
of time, more than 13.7 billion years ago,
the whole universe, absolutely every 
inch of it, had the right temperature
to support life.
Of course, the right temperature
alone is not enough for life. We also need
chemical elements like carbon and oxygen,
which are forged in the cores of stars.
But were there stars in super early cosmic times?
Maybe yes – in regions of the universe where
matter was especially dense. Such stars
would have been very massive and gone supernova
in just 3 million years – seeding the baby
universe with the chemical elements needed
to form dust, asteroids, planets
and the ingredients of life.
Maybe the first ancestors of life were more
exotic and didn’t even need water, but thrived
in substances like ammonia or ethane that
can stay liquid at temperatures far below
0 °C. They could have been sustained by the
lingering warmth of the Big Bang for tens
of millions of years longer, well into a time
when we know for sure there were stars and
all the chemical elements.
The real magic of this idea is that while
the universe today is extremely deadly and
hostile, back then the conditions for life
might have been basically everywhere.
For a period that may have lasted several dozen
million years, primordial life might have been
able to emerge on any rock,
even between the stars
- sowing the universe with the 
seeds of what, billions of years later,
would become bacteria, 
trilobites, dinosaurs, and finally us.
At some point the universe cooled below the
right temperature for life to thrive, but
some of those ancestral life forms may have
continued to exist in the internal warmth
of the first planets, frozen in asteroids
or hibernating in cosmic dust – tiny seeds
roaming the cosmos waiting for new hospitable
places to continue evolving. If they did,
life now might be everywhere in the universe.
Will We Ever Know?
All this makes for a nice story. And while 
both the habitability of the baby universe 
and our exponential clock of life 
are reasonable ideas
– they are still speculative.
One more possibility among many others, trying
to explain our existence today.
But if life came to Earth from outer space,
then it should have seeded other places in
the solar system too. Maybe there are fossils
in dry riverbeds on Mars. Maybe we’ll soon
find life in the warm underground oceans of
Enceladus or Europa. Titan has seas, rivers
and lakes of ethane and methane as warm as
the universe when it was 90 million years
old. So finding exotic life on Titan would
support the idea that life could have originated
in the weird baby universe.
So far, when we look out into the cosmos we
don’t see anyone like us. But maybe that's
because life needed ten billion years or
more to reach the level of complexity that
allows for a technological species. Maybe
there are millions of worlds filled with microbes,
oceans full of exotic fish, and continents
of bizarre animals. And maybe even others
like us, that just recently gained consciousness
and are beginning to look at the sky,
wondering if they are alone.
Life could be flourishing right now in uncountable
forms and in all kinds of cosmic environments.
And if many of us share a common cosmic origin,
we would all be part of a great cosmic family.
The answer may lie in our cosmic backyard. 
Let’s go and find out!
It’s time. Let’s reveal the 12,024 
Human Era Calendar with a Big Bang! 
The kurzgesagt calendar is special because we are adding 
10,000 years, to include all of humanity  
no matter their culture or origin.
12,000 years ago humans first started  
working together on a larger scale, laying the 
foundation for civilization and the future of  
us all. A much better representation 
of how far our species has come!
This year we’re looking at the 
cosmos and all the possible life that  
could be thriving on myriads of worlds – 
hosting radically different animals and  
beings from the ones on earth.
Where in the universe might life exist?
And how would different cosmic 
environments affect the basic rules of life?
Join us in 12,024 and find out!
Explore strange cosmic habitats and  
extraterrestrial life forms on 12 awe-inspiring 
pages. There is also lots of room for you to  
keep track of your life here on Earth.
Add some serious space magnificence  
to your home but be careful – the 
extremely radiant cover may blind you.
Get the calendar now before it 
sells out. We also have bundles  
and special calendar deals with 
some of your favorite products.
Thank you so much to all of the thousands 
of birbs who get the calendar every year.  
With every purchase you support 
the kurzgesagt vision of sparking  
curiosity and inspiring people all around 
the world. We wish you an epic year 12,024!
Every two years one million Japanese 
disappear.
 China’s population will halve by the end of the century,
the median age in Italy has reached 48. 
All around the world birth rates are crashing – Is humanity 
dying out? What is going on and how bad is it?
For hundreds of thousands of years the human 
population barely grew at all, haunted by disease,  
famine and war until the industrial revolution – 
exponential progress led to exponential growth,  
pushing our numbers to 6 billion in the 
year 1999 and 8 billion just 24 years later.  
And our numbers will continue to rise 
for at least another 60 years
– but this growth obscures something: 
People kinda stopped having babies.
For a stable population, every couple needs to 
have two children on average.
If the number is higher it grows, if lower, it shrinks. 
If it's well below, it shrinks a lot, and quickly:
Like in South Korea, one of the hottest 
exporters of pop culture.
Its fertility rate lay at 0.8 children per woman 
in 2022, the lowest in the world.
This means 100 South Koreans of childbearing 
age today will have 40 kids.
Who then will have 16 kids, 
who then will have 6.  
If nothing changes then within 100 years 
there will be 94% fewer young people 
and South Korea will see a population implosion. 
That is if things stay the same
– we have yet to see if there is a 
bottom to fertility rates.
Although looking at the bigger picture and absolute 
numbers, this population will not shrink that much
– it simply returns to the level it once was. 
In 1950 there were 20 million South Koreans,  
in 2023 there are 52 million. And by 2100 there 
will be 24 million again.
But the issue is not that there 
will be fewer South Koreans, 
the issue is the composition of the population.
In 1950 the median age was 18. In 2023 it is 45. 
In 2100 it will be 59. A country of seniors.
And South Korea is far from alone.
China may be seeing the steepest population 
reversal in history, unstoppable at this point.
Rapid industrialization, urbanisation and 
rising incomes meant that the Chinese started to  
prefer smaller families. That, plus the 
introduction of the One Child Policy,  
which aimed to slow population growth, means that 
China has had a low fertility rate for decades.
With a fertility rate of 1.16 births per woman,  
within four generations 100 young 
Chinese will turn into 20.  
China's fertility rates are now one of the 
lowest in East Asia, lower than even Japan's.
In comparison Europe’s depopulation 
is much slower despite low fertility,  
since unlike Asia most states have had a steady 
flow of immigrants. The impact is complex,  
as a good chunk of immigrants come 
from other low fertility rate areas,  
the number of immigrant women who do have a lot of 
children is not yet high enough to make a big dent  
and fertility rates of immigrants tend to adjust 
to the native population within 2-3 generations.
In Eastern Europe, the decline has sped up even 
more because many young people have emigrated to  
stronger economies, like Germany – whose median 
age is one of the highest in the world at 46.
Latin America fell below 
replacement in 2015. In the US,  
immigration is the only thing keeping 
the population growing substantially.
There are still places where fertility 
rates have not fallen below replacement yet:  
In much of the Middle East, North and Sub 
Saharan Africa fertility is still high,  
which creates the same concerns 
about overpopulation as when  
Asia grew very quickly in the 1950s, 
but that turned out to be unfounded.
But recently the UN has reduced its forecast 
for Africa’s population drastically. For Nigeria  
estimates were lowered from 733 million 
to 546 million by 2100. Similar trends are  
being noted across the continent. As Africa 
develops, fertility rates are shrinking much  
faster than anticipated. It is becoming 
more likely that East Asia’s story will  
repeat itself – by the end of the century most 
places in Africa may be below replacement too.
So declining fertility rates 
and ageing populations have  
become a general trend, all over the world.
Why is all of this a big deal?
Demographics & Poverty
For a functioning society you need enough 
people in the prime of their lives.
Young and middle aged people do most of 
the work. In any economic system,  
working age people create a society’s wealth.
In retirement you stop contributing as 
much to the economy. But the majority of  
healthcare costs are generated by 
seniors. The way the world worked  
in the past was that a lot of younger 
people took care of a few older people.
Imagine a society where most people are 
older than 60. The financial burden for  
the young will be immense, unsustainable 
even for the richest countries.
Even in the best case this will mean 
people having to work way longer,  
exploding health care costs and poverty, while 
states with shrinking income struggle to keep up  
with rising costs. Technology might soften 
the blow, but can’t compensate entirely.
We can see this happening already – 11 out of 
31 provinces in China are running deficits for  
their pension funds. They got old before 
they got rich and now they can’t really  
catch up anymore. China’s working age 
population is predicted to fall by 20%,  
or 200 million people by 2050 – as much as 
today’s entire working age population of the US.
Infrastructure collapse is an almost 
universal constant of population decline. 
Because infrastructure works at scale and 
doesn’t get cheaper to operate if it is used  
by fewer people. If a population declines, 
be it because of urbanisation or the loss  
of industry and employment – once people and 
their income disappear, the resources necessary  
to sustain infrastructure disappear too.
You can see it in many depopulated towns  
and cities in East Germany that suffered 
sharp population decline after German  
reunification. Or look at Japan. You can 
tour the countryside to see dying towns.
Wait – if there are fewer people, won’t life get 
cheaper and better and there’ll be more resources  
to go around? Well no – population decline 
doesn't lead to prosperity. It’s people’s  
ideas and work that create our prosperity, 
not the mere availability of resources.
Another danger for ageing societies is that 
elected governments could decide to mostly  
represent the interests and fears of their 
elderly populations – potentially leading  
to short term thinking and a preference 
for conserving wealth over innovation.  
That's not a society that can handle 
issues like climate change, which need  
massive investment and fresh ideas – something 
the world is already having a hard time with.
Many people think that having fewer humans on earth is 
actually a good thing because our societies are  
too unsustainable, we are using up too many 
resources and because of climate change.
The problem is, that even if you want fewer
humans, this process is very likely too slow  
to have a positive impact on the environment – the 
world population is going to grow for at least 60  
more years before it may shrink again – by then we 
have to solve climate change. Likewise, any other  
upsides a lower population might have will most 
likely not materialise themselves this century.
So Just Like 
Import People?
The easiest solution seems to be immigration, 
but the fertility of immigrants adjusts to local  
levels within three generations. So you need 
a constant influx of new migrants – which is  
not sustainable long term as birth rates are 
dropping everywhere. The only way would be  
to keep poor countries poor, so that the young 
and motivated migrate to developed countries,  
looking for opportunity and a better life. 
Kind of an immoral thing to wish for.
By the end of the century Africa will have 
the highest number of young people in the  
world and so African migrants might become 
the world's most sought after immigrants,  
with elderly nations fighting hard for 
every person willing to make the move.
Immigration also can create societal or cultural 
tensions, which is a universal phenomenon in all  
cultures – especially when cultures with very 
different sets of values meet – often leading  
to a backlash that slows immigration down 
again. It’s easy to be frustrated at this,  
but ignoring this will only divide societies, 
empower demagogues and increase xenophobia.
Economically, immigration is 
largely beneficial for societies,  
even if this seems counterintuitive to many 
people. Especially countries like the US,  
an immigrant nation built on the idea of personal 
freedom and opportunity through hard work,  
will benefit the most. Countries like this 
will have a clear advantage this century,  
especially if they can attract the 
world’s brightest and most ambitious.
Conclusion & Our Opinion
This topic is way too big, affects 
societies as diverse as literally  
all of humanity. So please take this 
part with a gigantic grain of salt,  
obviously we are looking at this from 
our central European perspective.
One way to look at falling birthrates is 
as a side effect of the world being less  
bad than it was. Especially women are
freer, more educated and wealthier than in the past.  
But it turns out that if societies are better 
off, individuals often decide to have fewer kids. 
Interestingly, there is a gap between how many 
kids people want and how many they are having:
The mean number of kids women in Europe want is 
around 2.3, much more than they are actually having.
While we gained a lot of freedoms in the last 
century, across continents and economic systems,  
that came at a cost: The tight knit 
communities and family structures  
that were part of our nature, where 
kids could be brought up by a village.
Today young parents have to deal with 
different challenges and societal expectations.
Women are kind of ground down between the wish 
and expectation to have a family and a career,  
being pressured to do both but not 
compromise either. Men are sharing  
parental duties more equally than they used to, 
but are often still expected to be the provider.
And it is sadly true that usually, at least one 
parent's career is held back. In many developed  
countries the gender pay gap is chiefly a 
pay gap between mothers and everyone else.
But it is not just outside pressure: Our 
culture of individualism probably plays a  
role too. We have only one life to explore, be 
free, travel, have fun, accomplish something
and try to be happy. So people commit 
to partners later in life and often  
decide against big families or any at all. And 
that’s fair, nobody owes their country babies.
So far no country has successfully managed 
to increase birth rates significantly,  
so as of now we don’t really know what works. But 
here are a few options to at least make the lives  
of parents much easier: free and abundant access 
to childcare, financial benefits for parents,  
more and cheaper housing. Parenthood has to stop 
being a career obstacle. And our culture needs  
to become more positive towards families. 
And that is something we can all work on.  
The next time you sit next to a crying baby 
– don’t be a jerk about it. Kids are hard.
In the end, humanity will not die out because we're having 
fewer babies. The age and composition of our  
societies changes quickly and we need to deal with 
that sooner rather than later. But in the end,  
of all the incredibly hard challenges we faced 
before, why would this be the one we can’t solve? 
Getting to the bottom of the population crash 
starts with analyzing and interpreting massive  
amounts of data. And if you’re looking 
for a free way to start building your  
data skills — which are more essential than 
ever these days — we recommend Brilliant.org.
Brilliant’s latest course, “Predicting with 
Probability,” will teach you everything  
you need to get started in data science. No 
coding required. You’ll analyze vast datasets,  
compare distributions and master fundamental 
concepts that are key to some of the most  
in-demand careers in today's world.
Beyond data, Brilliant is the best way 
to master key concepts in everything  
from math and science to computer science and 
programming. Just set your goal and Brilliant  
designs the perfect path—and equips 
you with the right tools to reach it.
They have thousands of lessons to 
explore. And each one is interactive,  
like a one-on-one version of a Kurzgesagt video.
We’ve actually designed a whole series of lessons 
in collaboration with our friends at Brilliant  
that cover the topics from our most popular 
videos, from rabies and mammalian metabolism,  
to climate science and supernovas. And you 
can try them and many more for free today!
To get hands-on with Kurzgesagt lessons and 
explore everything Brilliant has to offer,  
you can start your free, 30-day trial 
by signing up at Brilliant.org/nutshell.  
There’s even an extra perk for Kurzgesagt viewers:  
the first 200 people to use the link get 20% 
off an annual membership once their trial ends.
Absolutely everything you think about yourself
and the universe could be an illusion.
As far as you know, you are real and exist in
a universe that was born 14 billion years ago
and that gave rise to galaxies, stars,
the Earth, and finally you. 
Except, maybe not.
You may actually not exist for real
but be the dream of a dead universe 
– you and everything you think exists.
Crazy as it sounds, this may be an unavoidable consequence
of our best scientific theories about the universe.
Ok, this is a bit much – let’s start at the beginning.
We need to understand three concepts
for this idea to make sense!
1. The Arrow of Time
What distinguishes the past from the future?
Put a drop of red ink into a glass of water
and you see the ink spread until it fills
the container but never the opposite:
colored water where ink spontaneously concentrates
and becomes a drop at the surface again.
Time always seems to flow in the direction
in which the ink spreads.
But if you take a microscope, all you see
will be a swarm of molecules colliding at random 
– there are no rules, no forwards and backwards.
Every individual motion that happens can occur in reverse.
But we perceive a sort of arrow of time 
that makes things happen in one direction
– how does this phenomenon occur?
Well, this arrow of time is not actually fundamental,
but a matter of probability.
When ink molecules spread to fill a glass,
there are many different “slots” of space they can occupy,
and therefore many different possibilities to combine them.
And just like your chances of winning the lottery grow 
the more tickets you have, 
the probability that ink molecules will end up 
filling the glass is much higher
than the probability that they'll concentrate in just one spot.
So it is not that the ink forming a drop again
is forbidden by the laws of physics, it's
just extremely unlikely.
To see it you’d have to wait about 10 to the power of 100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 years
– a 1 followed by one hundred sextillion zeros.
If you had this much time to spare, eventually
by pure random chance, you’d see a red blob
form again. Actually, with enough time,
you could see any shape forming. Like, for example,
a small, red, soggy brain.
Ok, let’s move on to idea 2.
2. The far future of the universe
Our universe was born 14 billion years ago
in the Big Bang, it expanded and evolved
to give rise to the myriads of galaxies and things.
In other words, the universe is kind of
a glass of water with a lot of ink doing
stuff – it has an arrow of time.
But the universe is not a static glass, it
seems to be getting bigger at an ever increasing speed
because of dark energy. Basically, everything
in it is getting more and more diluted.
In about 100 trillion years, the last star will
die. Then few interesting things will happen
for the next few decillions, vigintillions
and googols of years.
Eventually the universe will be a dark place 
fully dominated by dark energy
– a rapidly expanding ball of pure space 
almost devoid of matter.
You might think that this would lead to the 
ultimate death of everything 
but dark energy
has one last surprise for you.
In a universe dominated by dark energy, space
expands so dramatically
that it creates a "cosmic horizon" around you:
a border beyond which nothing will ever 
be able to reach you, not even light. 
So for every practical purpose,
the universe has become a glass of finite size
about 36 billion light-years wide, surrounded
by an impassable cosmic horizon.
Such a universe glass is basically a giant black hole 
turned inside out.
We know that, due to quantum effects, all
black holes emit a tiny amount of particles
– a phenomenon known as "Hawking radiation".
And so does our inside out black hole.
In the end, this radiation will fill the universe
glass with particles again.
At this point, so far in the future that giving you a number
has no more meaning,
we've reached the true final state.
The universe has now become a closed box
full of particles at an extremely low but finite
temperature. And since they have a temperature,
they undergo random motions. Or in other words:
a glass filled with water and ink
and an infinite amount of time ahead.
Things are about to become interesting again.
3. Typing Monkeys & Fake Universes
Eternity is a long, long time.
So now even the most extremely unlikely things can happen.
The fluctuating particles are bumping into each other 
over and over and over again
creating every combination of particles that's possible.
They're like a monkey typing at random on a typewriter.
Almost all of the time it types gibberish.
But with enough time, eventually
it will write the first acts of Hamlet.
And with even more time, the complete works of
Eminem.
If ink in our universe glass generates any
random arrangements of particles, what could they be?
Well, a spontaneous fluctuation could give rise to a planet.
Or to a galaxy. Or even
to a lot of them. So maybe our universe has
already ended and all we see around us is
a “pop-up universe” – not a universe
that evolved from a Big Bang, but one that
fluctuated into existence by pure chance.
And that, like the drop of ink, will only
exist for a while before dissolving again.
Being random, pop-up universes could be similar
to ours but with funny glitches.
In some of these universes dinosaurs are riding snails.
In another, stars are made of blueberries.
In another you are wearing a funny hat.
Scientists in such universes wouldn't understand
those glitches, so maybe the greatest mysteries
of physics are just nonsense bugs
of our pop-up universe.
But not all possible fluctuations of our dead universe
have the same probability of occurring.
Smaller fluctuations are much more probable
than bigger ones. A planet is more likely
than a galaxy.
But you know what is even way more likely? 
A human brain.
Are you actually just a brain?
You think, therefore you exist. 
But what else do you truly know?
 In the end, your brain is just interpreting 
signals from your senses
and creating a world that you experience.
So technically, you could be just your brain
that thinks the world is real. And if we follow
the logic of the ink in the universe glass,
in particular, you could be a disembodied
brain that, just by chance, emerged in a dead
universe with your complete set of knowledge
and memories.
This is a pretty bizarre idea but if we do
the math, it is kind of pretty solid. Let’s
compare the number of brains inside bodies
in a living universe with the number of naked
brains in a dead universe.
Let’s go really big and imagine that a total
of 100 quadrillion humans will live around Earth.
And that the same amount of people
will live around every star in the universe.
If we add this together we get about 10 to the power of 41
brains inside bodies that will exist.
However, in a dead universe that has had enough
time to explore all possible fluctuations
and that will exist forever, the number of
naked brains that would emerge is well…
infinite.
So the probability that you are a floating brain
is not only vastly larger than the probability
that you are a real human. It is so inconceivably larger
that we can’t even meaningfully quantify
the difference. How do you compare a number
to infinity?
So… are you a floating brain that exists
for one moment in time, then basically forever
passes and then you exist for another moment in time?
Maybe not even in that order? Maybe
your life happens backwards and you just don't notice?
Maybe you have lived trillions of times already.
Are you the dream of a dead universe?
Really? Like, really?
Well, probably not. First of all, there are
a few loopholes. For example, dark energy
could behave completely differently from what
we think today and lead us to another future.
Or maybe our dead universe will be too motionless
to allow the creation of brains, even with
infinite time... Or maybe the universe will
end up dying in another way.
Our understanding of the cosmos doesn't have a solid enough
foundation for anyone to worry
if they are real or not.
Loopholes aside, if you were a fluctuating brain,
all the laws of physics stored in your
brain would have originated at random and
shouldn’t bear any relation to the real
world. But we just used those laws to prove
that you are a floating brain! So even if
you believe that you are a floating brain,
you’d have to admit that you have no good
reason to believe that you are actually
a floating brain.
Ok. So this hallucinatory trip might teach
us something about our theories about the
universe. But in the end it is just a really
weird exercise in what you can do with physics.
An exercise of what brains in bodies are able to think about.
So don’t worry – you are not a dream of the dead universe. Probably.
At kurzgesagt we love discussing topics like
Boltzmann brains because we’re convinced
that taking science and philosophy seriously
is really important for having a positive
impact on the world.
We’re lucky because this is our job – doing
something impactful we also enjoy
 If you’re also aiming to make a positive difference,
where should you start? Well, we’ve noticed
a lot of advice about having a positive impact
isn’t based on the best available evidence.
Today’s sponsor, 80,000 Hours, aims to offer
some that is.
80,000 Hours is a a nonprofit career advice
organisation that wants to help people find
fulfilling careers that also do a lot of good
in the world – and their advice is free
to read online, without any hidden cost or
fee later on.
They’ve spent the last decade compiling
and conducting research into topics like,
"how much impact can one person actually
have" and "what are the best ways to make
a positive difference on important global
issues". And, like us, they care a lot about
making sure their work is based on the best
available evidence and consultation with experts.
You can read their main takeaways and actionable
advice in their free online career guide,
that's recently got a massive update for 2023.
If you’d like to read it for yourself and
start working towards a career that is both
meaningful and helps solve one of the world’s
most pressing problems, then you can find
it all completely free at 800000hours.org/kurzgesagt.
Mr. President! Nuclear missiles will 
strike our country in 14 minutes.
I know it’s your first day in office so I’m going 
to walk you through it, but you’re the only one
who can authorize our nuclear retaliation in  
response and you’ve only got a 
few minutes to make a decision!
As you know tensions have escalated 
rapidly in the past few days.
Today’s joint allied aerial defense exercise 
began just minutes before we detected the launch.
A simple misunderstanding maybe.
We assume the sudden attack is meant to neutralize 
as many of our nuclear forces as possible.
But that doesn’t matter now – missiles are in 
the air and we can’t shoot all of ‘em down.
Why? Because Intercontinental ballistic 
missiles are basically rockets launched into space
before re-entering the atmosphere over their 
target and releasing many different warheads.
Higher and faster than anything 
you can send after them.
We need to get you to the bunker!
Here is what we know: Four minutes ago 
our new infrared monitoring satellites
detected one hundred twelve bursts consistent with 
ICBM launches from the enemy’s inner territories.  
For some reason only 20 of their 80 underground 
nuclear silos seem to have fired, so we suspect  
most of them were transporter-erector launchers, 
you know: trucks with big missiles on them.
It’s unclear why they didn’t 
use all their silos – they  
might just not work after more than thirty years
or they might be keeping them in reserve. The 
fog of war is keeping many things unclear!
Aerospace Command thinks the ICBMs are 
targeting our nuclear command centers,  
silos, and major airforce and navy bases, 
ending this war before we have a chance to act!
The enemy’s strategic doctrine prioritizes 
military targets and our nuclear weapon  
systems, but their secondary targets are our 
industry and infrastructure – oil refineries,  
power stations and deep water ports. All 
located near or in major population centers.
We won’t know the exact 
casualty count for a few weeks.
Deaths from the blast and burns 
may be a few million today.
It’s morning rush hour and there’s not much 
to be done for people stuck in traffic.
People in major metro areas can’t really 
evacuate, but emergency broadcasts are  
being sent out to shelter in place and away 
from windows. Radiation exposure for intact  
population centers is highly dependent 
on the weather over the next week.
We might be looking at dozens of millions 
of deaths by the end of the month.
For the next few minutes we can  
still respond, but –
You need to decide!
We’ve got 1500 warheads across our 
silos, bombers, and submarines.
The 400 in silos need to be launched now
before they get taken out.
46 nuclear capable bombers on high alert
can be ready to take off in 2 minutes –
though we need to transmit the order now
to get them out of the blast radius
if you want to consider using them.
Of our 14 nuclear submarines, 
5 are presently at sea.
While they’re submerged they’re 
undetectable, so that’s our  
back-up for a nuclear retaliation
if we lose our silos and bombers.
We could try to use them 
to bomb out their remaining 
silo fields before they can launch them.
The sooner you commit to it, 
the better the chance we have
of preventing a further 
exchange after our retaliation.
Updates!
We have radar confirmation that the enemy ICBMs 
have completed their burn 
and deployed their warheads.
Our best guess is that each missile will 
deploy at least 6 re-entry vehicles,  
about 600 in total, which is the part that 
carries a warhead back into the atmosphere  
during its terminal descent onto the target 
– and with many more decoys on top of that,
inflatable balloons meant 
to waste any anti-missiles. 
We’re now tracking nearly 4000 potential targets.
Our anti-ballistic missiles have been launched 
and will begin their intercept in another minute.
We’ll do our best to protect the capital,
although there really is no defense.
Wait… confirming a partial radar 
blackout, our systems seem to be glitchy.
The enemy must have anticipated we’d launch our  
interceptors and pre-detonated 
a few warheads at high altitude.
That ionizes the atmosphere 
and creates radar interference.
Our interceptors should still operate okay,  
they’ve had a 55% success rate in 
tests but never with this many decoys
or with radar interference this intense.
We might shoot down 50 objects,  
but there’s no guarantee they’re warheads.
It looks like most bombs are going to get through.
This is our last chance to counterattack. 
We’re out of time. Our silo launch  
sequence takes 5 minutes. We have to 
transmit and confirm a launch order
and the missile needs time to clear 
the blast radius of the incoming bomb.
This is a lot to take in, 
but the war plan is made, 
you just need to enter the 
launch authorization codes
and push this button to transmit them!
You can’t do anything else 
to save more of our people.
If you don’t launch now then this war will be 
over before it even begins –
you understand this is our one chance, right?
The effect? Enemy civilian casualties are hard 
to estimate, but should be similar to ours
– a few million right away, perhaps a few 
tens of million by the end of the month.
The total fallout from their attacks 
and ours might trigger a nuclear winter,  
potentially killing billions around the world – 
but that might happen even if we don’t retaliate.
I’m sure you have questions but you have 
to give orders without expecting 
answers right now.
With an attack of this scale there’s no guarantee
communications or assets will 
be intact in a few minutes.
We’re out of time, we need a 
decision Sir. Can we launch?
Nuclear wars aren’t regular wars. They 
only last minutes, and in times of crisis,  
small conflicts can rapidly spiral out of 
control. Anything from small communication lags
to sensor errors to just uncertainty and the 
fog of war mean that no leader will ever have
a complete idea of what’s happening as a crisis 
unfolds. When tensions are high, accidents or  
misunderstandings can steer leaders - even those 
with good intentions - to launch a nuclear attack.  
Confused and with incomplete 
information, a single person
– yes, it's really just ONE 
single person who decides –
can literally make civilization-ending decisions
killing hundreds of millions of people in 
the time it takes to watch a YouTube video.
This story is fiction, but the world 
came very close to this several times.
In 1995 Russian radar detected a submarine 
launched missile and their nuclear forces went  
on full alert, except it was actually 
a scientific rocket to study auroras.
In 1979, US computers reported a full scale 
Soviet attack with only minutes to respond 
– except it was a training tape being 
incorrectly loaded into a computer.
In 1983, the Soviet satellite alert system 
showed five ICBMs launched from the US.
But it was a false alarm caused by
sunlight reflected on clouds.
During the Cuban Missile Crisis,
a Soviet submarine with no contact to
Moscow for several days concluded that  
nuclear war had begun and decided 
to launch a nuclear torpedo.
Luckily the authorization 
of  three officers was required.
One of them, Vasily Arkhipov, opposed it.
But what if he hadn’t? 
Any safeguard can fail, no matter 
how carefully designed it might be.
And decisions are being made right now
to build new weapons and missile systems
that commit the world to another 
century of nuclear stalemate,
complicated further by China's emergence
as a new nuclear superpower.
Simply accepting that the existence of nuclear  
weapons is inevitable might 
mean their use is inevitable.
But the world doesn’t have to be 
this way. Even incremental steps,  
taking apart one bomb at a time, will 
eventually result in a world with none.  
During the Cold War, the world had over
70,000 nuclear weapons
– through arms reduction treaties,
that number is now about 12,500.
Progress is not guaranteed, 
but it’s also not impossible.
Governments and militaries are not separate 
from their nations, they’re part of them,  
just like you. You have the power to 
make demands of your leaders and often  
this begins with just being aware of
an issue. If you want to learn more,  
we've compiled a number of resources for you 
in the video description and our sources.
This video was supported by Open Philanthropy. 
Did you know that there are countless more 
kurzgesagt videos that we upload on TikTok,  
Youtube Shorts and Instagram Reels? Byte-sized 
information, animated facts and inspiring thought experiments. 
After all, you also need videos you 
can watch quickly in a bathroom break! 
Our longer,  more in depth videos are happening here on 
Youtube – Short form is a completely different challenge 
that we are trying to do as well as 
possible – check them out if you are curious!
And if you want to discuss and share your thoughts 
about Science with other like-minded people,  
why don’t you check out our Discord community 
with over 80,000 birbs? 
We have channels where you 
can chat about STEM topics,
participate in events and the 
“academic question of the week”
… and we have the best emotes! 
After all, we want to spark your curiousity,  
but it’s always more fun to be 
curious together! See you over there!
Black holes can destroy everything – but
can they be destroyed?
What happens if we push physics to the absolute
limits, maybe even break it and the universe
in the process?
Let’s create a tiny black hole, about the
mass of our moon, in the Kurzgesagt Labs and
try to rip it apart.
Nuke It
Big booms break things.
So to set the mood, let’s explode the world's
entire nuclear arsenal around our black hole!
Boom
Black holes swallow whatever crosses their
event horizon, matter and energy.
And since E = mc2, all the energy that enters
a black hole increases its mass.
The mass of a black hole is proportional to
its size, so as we nuke our tiny black hole,
it just gets bigger and more massive!
Antimatter
Matter and antimatter annihilate each other.
What will happen if we throw a moon's mass
of antimatter at it?
Unfortunately, when an object enters a black
hole, the black hole will completely delete
its past identity – whether it’s made
of matter or of antimatter.
Black holes only care about gravity, which
only depends on the total mass-energy of an
object.
And the mass of a particle is the same as
its corresponding antiparticle, so throwing
an anti-moon has the same effect as throwing
a moon.
The black hole just gets more massive!
This “deleting ability” of black holes
is pretty interesting: It means that, despite
their size and power, black holes are, in
a way, similar to elementary particles.
An elementary particle, like an electron,
is an extremely simple object, fully specified
by just three numbers: its mass, spin and
charge.
And amazingly, the same is true for black
holes.
They have a mass, they can rotate and carry
an electric charge.
Once a black hole forms, it doesn't matter
if it came from a collapsed star, an anti-star
or a banana: it will always be fully described
by those three numbers, nothing else.
But if a black hole is basically a weird particle
– could we destroy it with an anti black
hole?
Anti Black Hole
How exciting!
A particle has the same mass as its corresponding
antiparticle but opposite charge.
Since a black hole has mass and electric charge,
its corresponding anti black hole should have
the same mass and opposite electric charge.
What if we make them collide?
Sadly, the charge will just add up and cancel
out.
So after the collision, we’ll just get a
new black hole twice as massive with no charge.
OK.
We need to think bigger and stretch physics
harder.
Destroy the Event Horizon
It is true that a black hole can carry spin
and charge.
But even for these crazy objects, there are
limits.
If the spin or the charge of a black hole
becomes too large, something really weird
will happen: the event horizon will dissolve.
In a simplified way, we think of black holes
as hiding a singularity inside – an infinitely
compressed mass with such strong gravity that
absolutely nothing can escape from its surroundings,
not even light.
This is why a black hole looks like a “black
sphere of nothingness”.
The event horizon is the outer edge of this
ultimate prison.
Cross it, and you’ll never be able to come
back.
But when a black hole rotates, it works a
bit like a spinning washing machine.
It is as if the rotation wants to repel nearby
objects and push them out of the black hole
– which doesn’t happen because its gravity
is so strong.
BUT – If the rotation gets too fast, this
effect will win and the event horizon will
disappear – nearby objects won’t be imprisoned
forever anymore!
The same thing happens with the electric charge.
Make it too large, and our ironclad jail will
break open.
If we managed to destroy the event horizon,
the singularity would still be there.
And objects would still naturally fall towards
it.
If you hit it, you would still die horribly
and quickly.
But the vicinity of the singularity won’t
be an inescapable prison anymore!
You could get as close as you want and come
back.
This should count as destroying the black
hole!
Can we do it?
Overfeeding
All we have to do is to overcharge or over-spin
the black hole.
We could do this by throwing objects with
a small mass and a lot of charge or angular
momentum, so that the charge or spin increases
faster than the mass.
We have to overfeed the black hole until it
reaches the point where it breaks open.
However, whether you can actually do this
is the subject of passionate argument among
physicists.
Think of a charged black hole.
Equal charges repel each other, and the more
of the same charges you squish together, the
more they push back.
So let’s say that we have a negatively charged
black hole and we want to overfeed it with
electrons, for example, whose charge is far
larger than its mass.
The electrons will feel an electrostatic repulsion.
And the more electrons we throw, the larger
the negative charge of the black hole will
be and the stronger the repulsion.
But once we reach the upper limit, the electrostatic
repulsion will be so strong that it won't
allow any more electrons to come in.
At this point, the black hole will refuse
to be overfed.
With the spin it works similarly.
Once the black hole reaches its upper limit,
it won’t gobble more spin.
But some scientists have discovered what looks
like a loophole.
If an instant before the black hole reaches
the limit, we throw the right amount matter
in just the right way, it looks like we could
actually overfeed it.
Most scientists are skeptical, but let's give
it a try anyway!
Breaking Physics
There is a catch though.
The event horizon of a black hole hides the
singularity.
So destroying the horizon would leave us with
a “naked singularity”, one that is not
hidden by an event horizon.
And this poses a problem: it could mean the
end of physics as we know it.
There is a big dirty secret about black holes.
Contrary to widespread belief, the singularity
of a black hole is not really “at its center”.
No.
It is in the future of whatever crosses the
horizon.
Black holes warp the universe so drastically
that, at the event horizon, space and time
switch their roles.
Once you cross it, falling towards the center
means going towards the future.
That’s why you cannot escape: Stopping your
fall and turning back would be just as impossible
as stopping time and traveling to the past.
So the singularity is actually in your future,
not “in front of you”.
And just like you can’t see your own future,
you won’t see the singularity until you
hit it.
But you also can’t hit something that is
in your future, only sort of… experience
it, like you will experience your next birthday
when it happens.
So you will feel the singularity once it happens
to you.
Singularities that are in the future are not
a problem because we can’t see them or interact
with them.
But a naked singularity would be in front
of us, for all of us to see.
What would we see?
Well, the whole point is that it’s impossible
to know.
A singularity is a region of infinite gravity,
and gravity is the bending of spacetime.
At a singularity, the bending is so radical
that the fabric of spacetime is literally
broken.
Space and time don’t exist anymore.
This means that you cannot predict anything,
since predicting means making a forecast about
where and when something will happen.
But “where” and “when” have lost their
meaning!
So we have an unpredictable thing with infinite
gravity, and therefore infinite energy.
This means that anything could come out of
it for no reason – from a pile of bananas,
to lost socks or a solar system.
Predictability, causality and physics as we
know it would break down.
We think that singularities should exist in
nature because we can prove that, under very
general conditions, gravitational collapse
leads to the formation of singularities.
However, scientists think that nature forbids
the formation of naked singularities.
Something enforces the creation of an event
horizon around them, to prevent their insanity
from infecting the rest of the universe.
Without event horizons, physics may not make
sense at all.
So although black holes have been portrayed
as the ultimate monsters of the universe,
they may actually be the heroes that keep
us safe from the madness of singularities.
So if we do destroy the horizon, we might
destroy the fundamental rules of the universe.
You know what?
Let’s not do that.
The Safe Option
As far as we know, there’s just one safe
method to destroy a black hole: Wait.
All black holes emit tiny particles – a
phenomenon called Hawking radiation.
This process causes them to slowly lose mass
until they eventually “evaporate”, leaving
behind no horizon and no naked singularity.
The time it takes for a black hole to completely
evaporate depends on its mass.
For our mini black hole the size of a speck
of dust, it will be about 10^44 years: 10 billion
trillion trillion times the present age of
the universe.
So, is it possible to destroy a black hole?
Yes!
We just have to wait.
But you don’t have to wait that long.
There are plenty of fascinating things to
explore right here on this planet, right now
– if you have the knowledge to understand
them.
To help you with that, we’ve created a series
of lessons to take your scientific knowledge
to the next level.
Made in collaboration with our friends at
Brilliant.org, these lessons give you a deeper
understanding of the topics from our most
popular videos, from rabies and mammalian
metabolism, to climate science and supernovas.
There's even a lesson on black holes, where
you can delve into the fundamental principles
behind their behavior and lifecycle.
Brilliant is the best way to master key concepts
in everything from math and science to computer
science and beyond.
Just set your goal and Brilliant designs the
perfect path—and equips you with the right
tools—to reach it.
Brilliant has thousands of lessons to explore.
And each one is interactive, like a one-on-one
version of a Kurzgesagt video.
Their latest course, “Exploring Data Visually,”
will teach you everything you need—and nothing
you don’t—to start your journey in data
science.
No coding skills required.
You’ll analyze real datasets, like one about
Starbucks, and learn the skills to draw insights
for yourself.
In a world overflowing with information, data
skills are becoming essential in virtually
every field.
Brilliant is the perfect place to start learning
them.
To get hands-on with Kurzgesagt lessons and
explore everything Brilliant has to offer,
you can start your free, 30-day trial by signing
up at Brilliant.org/nutshell.
There’s even an extra perk for Kurzgesagt
viewers: the first 200 people to use the link
get 20% off an annual membership once their
trial ends.
We love seeing how the gears interlock with
our research – Brilliant gives you the tools
Few of the monsters that evolution created have 
been so successful at hurting us as the variola  
virus, responsible for smallpox. The carnage 
it caused was so terrible and merciless that  
it compelled humankind, for the first time, 
to act truly globally. It was one of the  
greatest wins of our species over the ancient 
powers of nature, all made possible by… cows. 
Variola is a virus, a tiny machine that only 
seeks to reproduce itself. Evidence of It has  
been found in Egyptian mummies and in writing 
from India and China as old as 3000 years.  
1300 years ago smallpox killed up to a third of 
Japan’s population. By the sixteen hundreds, it  
was one of the major causes of death worldwide. 
In late 18th century Europe, it killed 400,000  
a year. Every third person who went blind did so 
because of this virus. Even in the 20th century,  
a hot second ago in history, it still killed at 
least 300 million people. Smallpox is an abusive  
monster that returns over and over and over 
again, killing, maiming, and disrupting societies.
How could variola be so incredibly deadly for 
so long and how could we have forgotten its  
horror so quickly? In 2023, there are only 
two laboratories left where the living virus  
is officially stored for research: 
in Koltsovo, Russia and in Atlanta,  
USA. Which is certainly a good idea 
because what could possibly go wrong?
Let’s say that through an unfortunate series of  
events the virus got out and you got 
infected. What would happen to you?
How Smallpox Kills
Variola is highly infectious and catches a ride 
in small droplets you breathe in. Immediately it  
begins to infect the cells that line your throat 
and starts killing them to cause chaos. Why?  
To trick your body into giving it 
a lift. Whenever cells in your body  
die a violent death, your immune 
cells immediately stream to the  
site of infection to help out. In 
this case that backfires horribly.
As immune cells begin cleaning up dead 
cells, eating viruses and killing infected  
cells , variola infects a crucial cell of 
your immune system: Your Dendritic cells,  
intelligence cells that gather information 
and leave the battlefield to get help.  
They enter your lymphatic system, a highway 
network that spans your entire body and  
connects hundreds of immune bases. In these 
bases your heavy defenses are activated and  
should be the last place an enemy would want 
to invade, but Variola wants to get here.
For about 12 days, the virus quietly 
infects civilian and immune cells,  
jumping from cell to cell infecting more and more 
of them. At some point a critical threshold is  
reached and variola starts its attack for real. 
Millions of viruses use the lymphatic highway  
to spill into your blood and organs, infecting 
your whole body. Suddenly variola is everywhere.
But despite this global attack, your 
adaptive immune system is struggling to  
wake up. Your immune cells look for and use 
critical transmitters called interferons to  
mobilize the body against viruses. Interferons, 
as the name suggests, interfere – significantly  
slowing down virus infections but also quickly 
activating millions of anti virus weapons.  
But Variola is able to deactivate interferons, 
which stuns the anti virus side of your defense  
system. Other systems would usually help 
- like the complement system, a sort of  
mobile minefield that can destroy viruses but 
variola also manages to shut this down too.
And so, with little resistance variola spreads 
everywhere and infects billions of your cells  
all over your body. Among the infected are your 
capillaries, the smallest blood vessels in your  
body, which die in great numbers. All this death 
activates an immune cell that you really don’t  
need right now but that is attracted by death: 
The Neutrophil. Normally an efficient killer of  
invaders great and small, it is not very effective 
against smallpox. And even worse, Neutrophils  
fight by vomiting deadly chemicals, which 
kills even more of your cells. On top of that,  
they order inflammation, fluids streaming from 
your blood vessels into your tissue. All over your  
body, as first millions, then billions of your 
cells die, you get a rash that only gets worse  
and worse. Pus and cellular junk fills it up as 
your body swells up with hundreds of lesions, all  
over your skin and inside, even on your organs, 
all filled with billions of variola viruses.
Now the critical phase begins. As you fight 
for survival, you burn up in a high fever,  
thousands of battlegrounds drain your blood of 
fluid that streams into your tissue and organs.  
Blood clotting appears all over your body while 
floods of toxins from dead cells build up and can  
cause organs to fail. Your lungs fill up with 
fluid, making it harder and harder to breathe.  
One of two things happens now: Either your immune 
system wrestles back control – heavy weapons have  
been dispatched, killing infected cells, cleaning 
up the thousands of infections one by one,  
killing variola wherever it can be found so 
you can slowly begin to recover. The immune  
system will forever remember variola, making 
you immune forever. Or, you die, overwhelmed  
by the infection and your immune system's 
panicked reaction to the body wide infection.
About a third of people who contract 
smallpox don’t survive. And if you survive,  
you are very likely branded by scars and 
may even lose your eyesight or hearing.
For thousands of years this terrible disease 
ravaged the world, leaving death and destruction,  
traumatized and maimed survivors. Until 
one day, humanity said: “enough”. 
  
Why don’t we have smallpox anymore?
Smallpox is one of the worst diseases 
humanity has ever known. A murderous,  
family destroying, life ruining monster. 
There was nothing you could do for the  
infected – but people noticed that 
if you survived, you were immune.  
So out of desperation, they came up with a 
dangerous practice of variolation: Take scabs  
from an infected person that had a mild case of 
smallpox, let them dry out and grind them to a  
fine powder. Then blow the powder up the nostril 
of a patient or scratch their skin with it. If  
things went well, they only got a mild version of 
smallpox and gained immunity against the disease.
Variolation probably worked because it introduced 
the variola in a part of the body the virus wasn’t  
prepared for, disabling most of its nasty 
tricks. And because the inoculation was  
left to dry out, that damaged the virus 
so it could not cause the full disease.
Unfortunately 2-3% of all patients still died 
because they got the smallpox or suffered  
other diseases as a result of treatment. Still, 
smallpox was such a horrible and to some degree,  
unavoidable disease that people took the 
risk, for themselves and their children.  
Variolation spread around the globe, 
while Variola continued to kill millions.
A victory over the virus only became a real 
possibility when scientists realized that  
it was not necessary to variolate with the 
real smallpox disease, but much safer to use  
material from cowpox, a variant that affected, 
surprise, cows. A truly revolutionary step – and  
only a few years later, this led to one of 
humankind's most outstanding achievements:  
Vaccinations. The innovation was simple – 
instead of using the real virus to train  
the immune system, use a related virus, cowpox, 
that was only mild but also gave you immunity.
Still, it would take another 200 years, countless 
individuals fighting the monster where they could,  
delivering vaccines to the most remote places 
on earth. All the while the disease ravaged on,  
killing over 300 million people 
in the 20th century alone.
In 1966 the World Health Organization decided 
that humanity had to come together in a final,  
major effort. A global "smallpox news 
network," based on residents in hotspots, was  
created – tackling local outbreaks of the virus. 
Cases were encircled, vaccines given, preventing  
further spread. Smallpox only infects humans, 
so if we stopped the human transmission chain,  
we would starve the virus. The last naturally 
occurring infection was in 1977, and in 1980,  
just shy of 200 years since the first vaccine 
was used, Smallpox was declared eradicated.
Variola, the scourge of humanity, was dead. 
No more children would be killed by it,  
no more mothers or brothers or uncles or 
cousins. It is hard to convey to people  
around today what an incredible win this was. 
One of the cruelest, most dangerous monsters  
that has hunted us for literally millenia 
was slain, by us, apes with pointy needles.
  
Today we live in a time of enlightenment. 
None of us alive today are haunted by the  
specter of smallpox. This light is not 
natural; it was set in the sky by the  
sheer will of humankind wanting to be 
safe from the monsters haunting us.  
But because we live without them, we forget 
that they ever existed and that they are real.  
That the diseases might reawaken, or 
new ones might be brewing in jungles,  
wet markets or laboratories, 
ready to strike us once more.  
We forget what an incredible gift vaccines 
are and how hard we had to battle to get them
We are still protected by the light but it is 
cooling each and every day, and we owe it to those  
who will come after us to make sure it doesn't go 
out. We killed one monster. We can do it again.
This video was supported by Open Philanthropy.
Do you want to continue learning about the 
fascinating world of biology? We’ve got you! 
Let’s take a real close look at the human body. 
This is an arm. And this is a human cell – the  
microscopic stage where everything happens. Where 
all the important battles are fought and where YOU  
are constantly built over and over again.
 
Even though It’s the smallest unit of life,  
the cell is extremely complex. But don’t worry 
we managed to fit everything you need to know  
on a single poster – and in true kurzgesagt 
fashion it’s easy to understand and even easier  
on the eyes. Grasping a complex topic is much 
easier when it’s presented in exciting ways.
The poster was researched and designed 
in collaboration with molecular biologist  
James Gurney – so it’s expert approved 
and contains all the latest cutting edge  
science about organelles, their function 
and their place in the cellular world.
We love bringing science into your home 
with our videos and we are so excited  
whenever we get to do it literally. This is 
why we take hundreds of hours to create our  
science posters – all researched with 
care and crafted with love by us here  
at kurzgesagt. We love having such a curious 
audience and we want to inspire you and all  
the birbs in your life to learn all about 
biology, space, humans and life itself.
Get the human cell poster now 
exclusively on the kurzgesagt  
shop and support the kurzgesagt 
vision of sparking curiosity.
how many moons could Earth handle the
main factor is space any Moon needs a
clean orbit and we have to take two
things into account
one it can't be too far otherwise it
won't follow a stable orbit around us
two it can't be too close either or the
gravitational pull of Earth will grind
it into crumbs these outer and inner
limits Define our moon Zone a
donut-shaped area where any additional
moon will have to live each Moon around
the earth requires its own personal
submoon Zone and these zones shouldn't
interact with each other like Runners on
Olympic racetrack they need to be spaced
out so that their Mutual influence is
kept to a minimum the bigger the mass of
a moon the larger the personal space
required
all in all simulations have shown that
only a few constellations would be
stable Earth could either host up to
seven moons as big as dwarf planet
series four pluto-sized moons or three
moon-sized moons and then what Tides
might be more violent there could be
different Canada systems and most
notably on some nights our Sky would be
adorned with three bright marbles
frequently casting beautiful Shadows on
each other
wow what a view but
what happens if the Earth suddenly stops
rotating and a thing that isn't attached
to its surface remains at its initial
speed not just cars buildings and people
but also water and our atmosphere
causing giant tsunami waves and Global
windstorms areas near the equator where
the Earth's rotational speed was the
fastest would be affected the strongest
there everything would continue to move
forward at 1 600 kilometers per hour
don't forget the long-term effects over
billions of years centripetal forces
have made Earth a bit wider at the
equator without rotation these forces
would vanish oceans would migrate to the
poles which are closer to the Center of
the Earth and have stronger gravity so
we're left with dry land around the
equator also our usual day night cycle
would cease to exist without rotation
one day lasts one year with six months
each of daylight and darkness and
Earth's magnetic field which is partly
generated by the rotation of our planet
might be altered once the Earth stops
rotating as a result we might face
higher exposure to deadly solar
radiation quite dramatic changes in case
you've ever wondered
fauna and Flora on Earth are incredibly
diverse about 8.7 million eukaryotic
species are estimated to live here then
again not that diverse around 1.5
million animals have been cataloged so
far almost 1 million are insects so if
you wanted to Showcase a condensed
selection with just 100 animals 65 spots
would be taken by insects and mammals
wouldn't even get a spot of their own
but numbers aren't everything it's the
Junctions that life has taken and the
different species that sprang from
common ancestors that make Evolution so
astounding
[Music]
foreign
[Music]
A breathtaking scientific revolution is taking
place – biotechnology has been progressing
at stunning speed, giving us the tools to
eventually gain control over biology.
On the one hand solving the deadliest diseases
while also creating viruses more dangerous
than nuclear bombs, able to devastate humanity.
What is going on?
Biotechnology is increasingly everywhere.
The cotton in your clothes, the vegetables
you eat, your dog.
Humans manipulate living things.
We use bacteria to produce insulin, connect
prosthetics directly with our brains and make
industrial enzymes to produce paper.
Gene therapy creates cures to previously untreatable
diseases while we are working on food crops
resistant to climate change. 
Our mastery over biology has been speeding
up so much that within weeks of the first
Covid 19 case, the unknown coronavirus was
broken down in laboratories and analysed.
Scientists generated a copy of its genetic
material to create a vaccine that was ready
for testing months after the pandemic began.
Something unthinkable a decade ago.
Where is all this sudden progress coming from?
Well, it's complicated.
But in a nutshell: really expensive things
got cheap and knowledge of how to do
impressive things spread freely.
The Human Genome Project starting in 1990
was the first major attempt to read human
DNA in its entirety. 13 years and $3 billion
later, it was complete.
By then the cost of decoding a human genome
had fallen to about $100 million.
Today it is 100,000 times cheaper, costing
only about $1000.
How is that possible?
Converting DNA into computer data and then
studying it used to be a super tedious process,
taking expert humans around 3 years of manual
work.
Today it takes about two weeks and is almost
completely automated. 
Biotechnology has gone from something restricted
to the best and well-funded laboratories staffed
by the world's top experts, to something affordable
enough for hundreds of thousands of people
to casually work on. 
What has sped up the process even more is
that information in the field is shared
widely and freely.
Cutting-edge discoveries now take just about
a year to be copied in laboratories around the world,
a few years for anyone with a biology
background to work out, and a bit over a decade
for high school students to experiment with
them in schools.
Imagine that your local computer repair shop
could build a pristine Iphone 11 with just
the parts lying around, and that teenagers
are asked to build a new Iphone 5 for homework.
Not a crappy homemade version, the real thing.
This is what is going on right now in biotechnology
– a true revolution. 
We are adding knowledge at unprecedented rates,
while things get ever faster and cheaper to do.
This speed means we can expect even more wonderful
things for humanity.
Lifesaving treatments, miracle crops and solutions
to problems we can’t even imagine right now. 
But unfortunately progress cuts both ways.
What can be used for good, can also be used
for bad, by accident or on purpose. 
For all the good biotech will do for us, in
the near future it also could easily kill
many millions of people, in the worst case
hundreds of millions.
Worse than any nuclear bomb.
The world just witnessed how fast the novel
coronavirus spread.
We still do not know for sure if it came from
nature or was the result of an accidental leak
from a lab working with corona viruses,
that’s still subject to scientific debate.
In the end at least 7 million people died.
And this was still a relatively mild virus
that didn’t cause serious disease in most of those infected.
But that might change in the future.
Wherever the last pandemic came from, the
next one might very well be our own fault
– in a sense, many things going on in biotechnology
could lead to this.
Most of all how easy it is to work with dangerous
viruses.
Thousands of scientists can simply order the
genetic data of infectious virus samples online
to experiment with them.
Assembling these into an artificial virus
in 2023 costs about as much as a new car,
including all the lab equipment. 
At the same time, other scientists are trying
to find viruses that hide in nature,
like in wild bats or monkeys.
There are probably plenty of potentially deadly
pandemics out there.
Virus hunters take samples back to the lab
to learn whether the newly discovered viruses
are likely to spread in humans and catalogue
the danger.
When a biologist discovers a new virus, they
usually publish its genetic data to the public.
Journals are eager to share descriptions of
potentially dangerous viruses. 
Other labs go further and make viruses more
dangerous.
They combine and mutate different viruses
to understand which mutations make them more
likely to spread between humans or make them
deadlier than their original forms.
And again, these results are shared freely.
All while synthetic DNA and equipment to rebuild
these viruses are sold online to anyone
without any or very little tracking.
As the tools of biotechnology get ever cheaper
and easy to use and the data on
dangerous viruses keeps multiplying, it is only a matter
of time before a well-meaning scientist shares
blueprints for the equivalent nuclear bomb
of viruses, a superbug that will cause millions of deaths 
– and someone uses it.
Maybe because they have bad intentions, maybe
because they are irresponsible or sloppy.
We are creating an environment in which it
is increasingly easy for anyone to create
a weaponized virus in their backyard. 
This is scary.
The world would be plunged into an unending
crisis as new pandemics pop up year after year
or all at once – killing large parts
of the world’s population, doing unimaginable
damage to civilisation as a whole, and possibly
undoing centuries of progress. 
It’s not the first time we’ve faced a
challenge like this and we are not helpless
– think of nuclear technology.
Something extremely powerful and dangerous
with huge upsides and downsides.
Nuclear energy was born from weapon programs,
so its creators were always aware of the potential
for their knowledge to be abused.
From the very beginning it was clear that
knowledge in this field and access to the
technology needed to be handled with utmost
care. 
So a lot of effort has gone into making sure
no radioactive material disappears from sight
or that countries don’t try to hide weapons
development behind energy programs.
The result hasn’t been perfect, but considering
the 411 nuclear power stations running today,
we’ve been very successful.
Likewise, no researcher would think to share
data on how to turn common laboratory equipment
into bomb-making machines on the internet. 
There is no reason we could not handle the
really dangerous aspects of biotechnology
in a similar way!
Experts have come up with three sort of bullet
points:
First we need to delay the next deadly pandemic
by getting a grip on how we treat dangerous viruses.
Their genetic data should be treated as an
infohazard: information that poses a danger
to society if it is shared without care.
In other words, not just anyone should be
able to order dangerous DNA online.
And if you do, you should be tracked, so it
becomes much harder for the wrong people
to access the really spicy stuff. 
The next step is detecting the danger by becoming
aware which viruses are present among us
and are spreading explosively between humans.
This could be as easy as having labs in population
centres maintain virus detectors
that monitor what is going on in the micro world.
If we suddenly see certain microorganisms
show up a lot in a short time, we can react quickly
and start counter measures.
Which is the final step: Destroy.
We basically need to build a machine that
is ready to destroy any pandemic threat
before it has a chance to take over.
We can do this with new tools that are being
developed right now, like nanofilters
that pull dangers out of the air we breathe or
specialized UV lamps that just kill any virus
before it has a chance to jump from person
to person.
And of course, we need to get better at getting
new vaccines faster than ever before in history.
If we do these three things, the chances are really
good that we can avoid
a catastrophic pandemic in the future. 
Biotechnology,  like any exciting and powerful
technology, is neither inherently good or bad.
It has the potential to be both in breathtaking
ways.
We have the chance to a future where we get
to truly control biology  - our biology, 
the biology of the plants and animals around us
– and the biology of the microworld.
So let’s use it to create a future where
we triumph over pandemics and diseases for good.
This video was supported by Open Philanthropy. 
If you want to help and want to have a high
impact on the world,
check out the biorisk career guide from 80,000 hours,
a nonprofit organisation that helps people find careers
that can tackle some of humanity's greatest problems
in the most efficient way.
We put a link and further reading in the description
and sources.
Aside from biorisk there are more guides to
check out too! 
Let us tell you about one of the most embarrassing
moments in kurzgesagt history,
it’s a pretty great story. 
A few years ago we posted an image of a fake
evolutionary tree on social media.
Just to post something nice, without thinking
about it.
But we messed with the wrong birbs.
Immediately we got thousands of  messages
from you telling us how wrong it was, unscientific,
bad.
We underestimate that you take everything
that we put out into the world seriously and
you set high standards for our research and
fact-checking process. 
This hurt.
A lot.
We wanted to be better than that.
So we deleted it and contacted experts and
spent hundreds of hours on research and illustration
and developed a new visualization of the relationships
between species that did not exist before.
A Map of Evolution you can use to figure out
how closely you are related to a Flying Lemur:
Expert approved. 
We were extremely proud of the result – and
since we had spent so much time on it,
we turned it into a poster.
And from that a new vision was born:
We wanted to become the best infographic and scienceposter shop in the world.
Today we’ve designed almost 100 posters
and sold over half a million copies
– every single one made with love, care and lots of
attention to detail. 
All because you guys challenged us.
Thank you so much for that and for supporting
our weird ideas and our sometimes weird Merch.
Because of you we can continue to release
our videos for free for everyone and drop
hundreds of hours into new concepts to spark
curiosity in people all around the world.
Thank you so, so much for being part of our
vision – we literally couldn’t do it without you.
the next atomic bomb is made of DNA and
it's as affordable as a new car in
recent years genetic data has become
more available knowledge more widespread
and lab resources less expensive
bioengineering had previously been
restricted to well-funded Laboratories
where research produced Marvel's like
gene therapy and covid-19 vaccines but
now it's getting increasingly open to
anyone willing to spend a year salary on
lab equipment that includes people who
want to do harm who are poorly trained
in safety or just reckless from
terrorist attacks to lab accidents the
effects of a loose engineered virus
could be devastating in 1945 the
Manhattan Project spawned the threat of
nuclear Annihilation while
simultaneously providing the key to
nuclear power biotech is just as
threatening today and few people are
even aware of how powerful it's become
and will become in the next few years we
don't have decades to do something about
it we must act now but how watch the
full video on our channel to find out
An undead city under siege, soldiers and police 
ruthlessly shooting down waves of zombies that  
flood from infected streets, trying to escape 
and infect more cities. This is what happens when  
your body fights cancer, more exciting than any 
movie. How does this battle for survival unfold?
1. The Elimination Phase
It all begins with a single corrupted cell. It 
is no longer able to repair its genetic code,  
it can’t kill itself anymore and it is beginning 
to multiply rapidly. At this point things are  
not great, not terrible – this cell is not yet 
dangerous but if nothing happens, it soon will be.
Over a few weeks the corrupted cell keeps making 
copies of itself. One cell turns into dozens,  
hundreds, thousands. Because the 
original was broken, its copies are  
breaking and mutating even more. They 
turn into different genetic lineages,  
clans that are working together and competing. 
Some mutate in a way that makes them weaker,  
others’ mutations don’t change anything, 
while a few become fitter and better at  
survival. Together they now form a tiny, tiny 
tumor. Not cancer yet, but getting there.
The growing tumor needs a lot of resources. 
If the cells don’t get food and oxygen,  
they will die and the problem just solves itself. 
Unfortunately a few corrupted cells unlock a new  
mutation that saves them: The ability to 
order the growth of new blood vessels. And  
so your body provides the supply they need to 
survive. But as the tumor continues to grow,  
it starts causing damage – Neighbouring 
healthy cells begin to starve and die,  
which attracts attention. In a sense 
this tiny tumor is like a rogue town.
Imagine a group of rebels in Brooklyn decided that 
they were no longer part of New York but started a  
new settlement called Tumor Town, which happens to 
occupy the same space. The new city wants to grow,  
so it orders tons of steel beams, cement 
and drywall. New buildings follow no logic,  
are badly planned, ugly and dangerously crooked. 
They are built right in the middle of streets,  
on top of playgrounds and on existing 
infrastructure. The old neighborhood  
is torn down or overbuilt to make 
room for new stuff. Many of the  
former residents are trapped in the 
middle of it and begin to starve.
This goes on for a while until the 
smell of death finally attracts  
attention. Building inspectors and police show up.
In your body, attracted by the stench of dead 
cells your immune system is activated. First  
responder immune cells invade the tumor: 
Macrophages and Natural Killer Cells,  
police forces that go right to work, killing 
and eating tumor cells. They release chemical  
signals that let the whole immune system 
know that there is cancer to be eradicated.
Dendritic Cells, the intelligence 
officers of your immune system,  
collect samples of dead tumor cells and begin 
activating your heavy weapons: Helper and Killer  
T Cells. We explained these specialized super 
weapons in another video, but all you really  
need to know is that they have a library listing 
every bad thing that could come into your body.
While each cancer is unique, there are 
genetic corruptions that they can’t hide.  
And your T Cells know what to look for. They 
are the deadliest cancer killers you have.
By the time they arrive, the tumor has 
grown to hundreds of thousands of cells,  
but this is about to change. T Cells 
block the growth of new blood vessels,  
which starves thousands of tumor 
cells and puts an end to their growth.
Imagine the building inspectors, switching 
off electricity and water and putting up  
roadblocks to cancertown so no more 
food and materials can be delivered.
With no way to hide from the carnage unfolding, 
the tumor collapses as hundreds of thousands of  
tumor cells are massacred. Their carcasses are 
cleaned up and consumed by Macrophages that then  
order healthy tissue to regenerate. Your body 
has crushed the illegal Tumor Town without mercy.
You will never know about this fight or how 
many times this has happened inside your body.
Except… in this case something 
did not go as planned.
2. The Equilibrium Phase
Unfortunately, natural selection spoils your 
victory. By doing its best to destroy the tumor,  
your immune system accidentally selects 
the fittest tumor cells. Remember,  
the tumor consists of different lineages 
that keep growing and keep mutating. Most  
of these are eradicated. But just a few 
are more resilient. One cell survives – it  
comes from the fittest tumor lineage and was 
just a bit better at surviving the massacre  
than anyone else. It decides to do it 
all over again. But better this time.
This tumor cell is much stronger than any of 
the thousands that were killed. Maybe it is  
better at hiding, or fighting back. Maybe 
it grows faster or is better at stealing  
resources. Maybe it can survive with much 
less oxygen. And so it all begins again.
It's like the surviving rebels that started 
Tumor Town have learned their lessons. Now  
they know the law better and how to break it, 
what permits help them, how to avoid the police.
And so the surviving tumor cell makes thousands 
of copies that mutate and form new lineages,  
until once again a tumor has grown, 
made up from more resilient cells.  
The immune system does not care though, and this 
time it even has experience - instead of starting  
with police, swat teams go right in to tear Tumor 
Town down, killing its inhabitants without mercy.
But once again they don’t get everyone. One 
of them survives: a fitter tumor Cell from  
an already fitter lineage. This time it gets 
a cheap suit and studies the building code,  
pretending to be a lawyer to start Tumor Town all 
over again. This struggle now repeats a few times,  
each time the rebels learn a bit more about 
how to avoid the law. If at any point,  
the immune system gets all of the tumor cells, 
the story ends. But in this case, it doesn’t.
Finally, a tumor cell changes in a way 
that makes it properly dangerous, cancer.  
The type that kills people. How?
Immune cells have an off switch that deactivates 
them before they can attack – which in principle  
is a good idea. The immune system is extremely 
dangerous and in many cases it needs to be  
shut down, like around your central nervous 
system. But this off switch can be exploited.
The mutated tumor cell finds a way to switch the 
immune system off by targeting inhibitor receptors  
on anti cancer cells. Inhibitor receptors 
stop immune cells from, well, killing. 
This cell is the now powerful founder of a 
new lineage of cancer cells and mass produces  
thousands of new copies that once again change and 
mutate further. Building yet another Tumor Town.
3. The Escape Phase
The new cancer cells have become immune to 
the immune system and everything is different  
this time. Tumor Town has been rebuilt, 
even uglier and stranger than before,  
but now the cancer city council 
has forged all sorts of permits.  
As building inspectors come to shut 
down construction, they get confused.  
Stunned they wander off, unable to order 
the destruction of the sprawling buildings.
Police try to enter the illegal city 
to arrest the builders and execute  
inhabitants – but this time Tumor Town 
has erected its own roadblocks that keep  
the law from entering. Confused 
officers stand around helplessly.
As Tumor Town slowly envelops the former 
Brooklyn and more and more civilians die,  
T Cell swat teams arrive to end this travesty. 
But things got worse – new lineages of Tumor Town  
officials have started to forge court documents 
that order police to shoot at the Swat teams.
What the cancer cells are doing at this 
point is actively shutting down immune  
defenses by sending corrupt signals. The now 
malignant tumor is no longer a pushover and  
has begun creating the Cancer Microenvironment. 
A sort of borderland that is hard to cross. All  
avenues of attack have been shut down and 
uncontrollable growth is the consequence.
  
This is a dangerous tumor. Cells 
that are strong and able to fight,  
push your immune system back and expand further. 
If more mutations happen, then some of the cancer  
cells will begin to explore the world and 
expand into other tissues, to build new towns.
And this is exactly what makes cancer 
so harmful: it is taking up space and  
stealing so many nutrients that your true 
self has no room to function anymore.  
If this goes on for too 
long, organs will shut down.
But this tactic is a dead end. The more 
successful cancer gets, the more damage it  
does to its world. When the body dies, the cancer 
dies too. It truly is a game without winners.
Except, humanity is planning to win this game.
At this moment hundreds of thousands of scientists 
are working on new and better ways of killing  
cancer, to destroy and burn down Tumor Towns 
for good. In recent years immunotherapy has  
made enormous progress – it is a relatively 
new therapy in which your own immune cells are  
modified to kill cancer better than any medicine 
can do. It's like giving your building inspectors  
machine guns and flamethrowers. But this is a 
story another time – For  
now cancer is a battleground – but if human 
ingenuity is to be trusted, then one day,  
maybe in the not too distant future, we 
will eradicate it once and for all.
This video was made possible in part 
by direct viewer support and in part  
through a grant by Gates Ventures. 
Thanks a lot for their support!  
Please check out our source document for 
more background and in depth information!
The universe looks like a vast empty ocean 
sprinkled with the rare islands of galaxies..  
But this is an illusion. Just a small 
fraction of all atoms are found in galaxies,  
while the rest is thought to be drifting 
in between, in the intergalactic medium.  
Like the roots of some massive tree, 
gas spreads out from each galaxy,  
gravity funneling fresh mass 
into this dense, cosmic forest. 
  
Here in the intergalactic medium, are the raw 
materials of creation: hydrogen and helium,  
woven into sheets and filaments that flow into 
galaxies where they eventually create stars.
But if we look closely, we see who is actually in 
charge: Quasars, the single most powerful objects  
in existence. As small as a grain of sand compared 
to the amazon river, they reside in the centers  
of some galaxies, shining with the power of a 
trillion stars, blasting out huge jets of matter,  
completely reshaping the cosmos around them. 
They are so powerful that they can kill a galaxy.
What are they, and how do they mold the 
structure of the universe at their whim?
Everywhere You Look, Weird Things in the Sky
In the 1950s astronomers noticed mysterious 
loud radio-waves coming from spots all over  
the sky. They were named “quasi-stellar 
radio sources”, or “quasars” because they  
were dots like stars, but were seen in 
radio waves rather than visible light.
Everything about them was strange. Some flickered, 
others emitted high energy X-rays in addition to  
radio waves, but all seemed to be tiny. They 
also moved extremely fast, as much as over 30%  
the speed of light. The only explanation was 
that they must have been so distant that their  
apparent speed was actually the expansion 
of the universe moving them away from us.
But these enormous distances meant that quasars 
couldn’t just be stars, but the active cores of  
galaxies billions of lightyears away! And it 
gets crazier. To appear so bright and loud,  
given these vast distances, they are thousands 
of times brighter than the entire Milky Way.  
Monsters, exploding and screaming into the void 
with a violence not thought possible before.
As we mapped the sky, we discovered over a million 
quasars. And they all seemed to be very far away.  
Looking into space, far away means very 
long ago, because their light takes so  
long to reach us. Quasars were common 
in the early universe, having peaked  
in number 10 billion years ago when galaxies, 
and the universe itself was still very young.
Let’s go back in time, just 3 billion years after 
the big bang and see what was going on back then.
The Incredible Power of Quasars
How could an early baby galaxy be 
so incredibly bright and violent?
All that light and radiation couldn’t be 
stars, as there weren’t nearly enough of  
them. And since galaxies tend 
to grow with time by merging,  
the starlight from small galaxies shouldn’t 
be far brighter than any galaxy today.
There’s only one way to generate the vast 
amounts of energy a quasar shines with:  
feeding supermassive black holes. We 
still don’t know how exactly they formed,  
but it seems that every galaxy 
has one in their center.
But how can the brightest things 
in the universe be black holes,  
which trap anything and everything 
that crosses their event horizon?  
Well the light of a quasar is not coming 
from inside these black holes. Rather,  
it comes from the space around them, a massive 
orbiting disk of gas called an ‘accretion disk.’
Quasars use the same fuel as stars to shine: 
Matter. It is just that black holes are the  
most efficient engines for converting 
matter into energy in the universe.  
The energy released by matter falling 
into a black hole can be 60 times  
greater than that released by nuclear 
fusion in the core of a star. Because  
the energy released by a black hole comes 
from gravity, not from nuclear reactions.
Matter falling into a black hole speeds up to 
almost the speed of light before it crosses  
the event horizon, buzzing with an incredible 
amount of kinetic energy. Of course, once inside  
the black hole, it takes that energy with it. You 
only get to witness this energy if you drop your  
matter in the right way. Fall straight down and 
the outside universe gets nothing. But when you  
have a lot of matter, it spirals in incredibly 
fast towards the event horizon forming a disk.  
Collisions between particles and friction heat 
it up to hundreds of thousands of degrees.  
In a space not much bigger than our solar system,  
the core of a galaxy can release many times 
more energy than all its stars combined.
This is what a quasar is, a super 
massive black hole having a feast.
And these black holes eat a lot. Typical 
quasars consume one to a hundred Earth masses  
of gas per minute! Ten billion years ago, the 
universe was about a third of its current size,  
so the intergalactic medium was much less 
spread out, meaning the filaments of gas  
around quasars could feed them a banquet, making 
them vomit insane amounts of light and radiation.
The brightest quasars power jets, tangling the 
magnetic field of the matter around them into  
a narrow cone. Like a particle accelerator 
they launch enormous beams of matter out,  
plowing through the circumgalactic medium, 
forming plumes of matter that grow to hundreds  
of thousands of lightyears in size. It’s 
almost unfathomable in scale. A tiny spot  
in a galaxy carving out patches of the 
universe 100,000s of light years long.
But quasars can’t eat for long, 
maybe a few million years,  
because their feast ultimately kills their galaxy.
How Quasars Kill Galaxies
Okay, maybe “killing” is a bit of an exaggeration. 
A galaxy is still there after its quasar turns  
off. But it will never be the same again. Quasars, 
being among the hottest and brightest things in  
the universe, break their galaxies by heating 
them up too much and stopping star formation.
Hot gas cannot form stars. This sounds odd, 
because Stars are gas that collapsed in  
on itself and then got really hot. But 
in a cloud of gas that is already hot,  
atoms are moving quickly. When they collide, 
they hit hard, exerting pressure that resists  
gravity’s squeeze – so hot gas can’t 
form stars. Instead, the best gas for  
forming stars is already cold, and won’t put up 
a fight when it’s time to collapse into a star.
On top of that, quasars push gas out of 
their galaxies. Not only does this starve  
the quasar, but its galaxy loses 
the raw materials for new stars.
As sad as this sounds, it might be a 
good thing for life. The alternative  
can be far more dangerous: too many stars. 
New stars forming is usually followed by  
massive stars exploding in supernovae, 
so planets would be burned sterile.
But of course it's more complicated. Like the 
intricacies of our own planet’s biosphere,  
every piece of the galaxy is dependent on and 
influencing every other part of the galactic  
environment. While hot things, like quasars and 
supernovae, tend to push gas out of the galaxy,  
shockwaves and quasar jets can also compress 
gas, making new stars at least for a short  
time. And gas that leaves will mix with gas coming 
back in and recycle it back into the galaxy. But  
in general we can say that without 
things becoming a bit more chill,  
we would not exist today. Which 
brings us to our final question:
Did the Milky Way Have a Quasar in the Past?
It’s unclear if every galaxy went through a 
quasar phase, but understanding distant quasars  
may provide clues to the history of the Milky 
Way. Galaxies don’t do a good job of preserving  
their history. Like sand on a beach the endless 
churning mixes away the clues to their past.
It’s possible the Milky Way was once a quasar,  
which may have allowed our supermassive 
black hole Sagittarius A star to have  
grown to 4 million times the mass of the sun. 
But sadly we don’t know its ancient history.
And as dormant as it is now, Sagittarius A star 
could turn into a quasar in the future. In a few  
billion years the Milky Way will merge with 
Andromeda. We’ve seen over a hundred ‘double  
quasars’ in galaxies smashing together, where 
fresh gas is provided for the central black holes.  
But it won’t last for long. When galaxies 
merge, so do their super massive black holes,  
sinking into the center of their new galaxy, 
kicking up dust and stars in every direction.
We don’t know whether this will happen, but 
it would truly be an incredible sight. Maybe  
some beings in the far future are going to 
witness it and be in awe of what they see.
But you don’t have to wait that long. There 
are already plenty of fascinating things to  
explore right here on this planet, right now – 
if you have the knowledge to understand them.
To help you with that, we’ve created a series of 
lessons to take your scientific knowledge to the  
next level. Made in collaboration with our friends 
at Brilliant.org, these lessons give you a deeper  
understanding of the topics from our most popular 
videos, from rabies and mammalian metabolism,  
to climate science. There's also a lesson 
on black holes, where you can delve into the  
fundamental principles behind their formation 
and behavior. A deeper understanding will also  
help you appreciate their role in powering 
the quasars we talked about in this video.
Brilliant is an interactive learning tool 
that makes math, science, and computer  
science accessible with a hands-on approach. 
Because we know that to really learn something,  
you’ve got to do it. Think of each lesson as a 
one-on-one tutoring version of a Kurzgesagt video.
Brilliant has thousands of other 
lessons to explore, as well—from  
math-based topics like algebra and probability to 
courses around programming and data science.Their  
latest course, “How Technology Works,” takes you 
inside the technology you use everyday. You’ll  
walk in the footsteps of a hacker to discover 
why some passwords take decades to crack,  
explore how satellites in space know that your 
ride share driver is just down the street,  
learn why your favorite Kurzgesagt 
video might buffer on YouTube, and more.
To get hands-on with Kurzgesagt lessons and 
explore everything Brilliant has to offer,  
you can start your free, 30-day trial 
by signing up at Brilliant.org/nutshell.  
There’s even an extra perk for Kurzgesagt viewers:  
the first 200 people to use the link get 20% 
off an annual membership once their trial ends.
We love seeing how the gears interlock 
with our research – Brilliant gives you  
the tools to understand how 
everything fits together.
We know you’ve been waiting for a long time. 
Let’s reveal the next Limited Edition Pin:  
It’s the Dyson Sphere. This very special pin set 
represents our dream for the future of humanity.  
Charge it with energy from the sun and it will 
glow in the dark. Pre-order is available for  
only 72h, so order now before time runs out. The 
next limited edition pin will be revealed soon.
cutting sandwiches with much science
with a single straight cut can you half
a three ingredient sandwich with all
components perfectly halved there's
actually real science about this called
the ham sandwich theorem and the answer
might seem obvious when you're looking
at a theoretical symmetrical sandwich
but in reality sandwiches are messy but
Mass doesn't care about messiness it
still works it doesn't matter what form
the three ingredients have or how
they're positioned imagine a slice of
bread in Munich Germany a slice of ham
at a farmer's market in San Francisco
USA and a slice of cheese in a lunchbox
and a plane to Indonesia although this
might not be a sandwich in the classical
sense there is a single perfect cut that
halves all three slices at once we just
need a very big knife and there's more
math says there's always a perfect cut
for a four piece sandwich in a
four-dimensional space same for a
five-piece sandwich in a
five-dimensional space and so on thanks
maths now any multi-dimensional
civilization can be
Somewhere in your body, your immune system 
just quietly killed one of your own cells,  
stopping it from becoming cancer, and 
saving your life. It does that all the time.  
The vast majority of cancer cells you 
develop will be killed without you ever  
noticing. Which is an incredibly hard 
job because of what cancer cells are:  
parts of yourself that start to behave 
as individuals even if it hurts you. 
  
What is cancer and how does 
your body kill it all the time?
INTRO
Cancer is when corrupted 
cells multiply uncontrollably.
It can emerge from basically 
every type of cell in your body,  
so there is not just a single 
type of cancer but hundreds.  
Some grow slowly, others are aggressive, some 
can be treated effectively, others are deadly.
In a sense, a cell that becomes cancer turns 
into something ancient and something new. Over  
billions of years, evolution has molded cells 
to survive and thrive in a hostile environment,  
fighting for space and resources. Until a new 
and exciting way of life emerged: Cooperation,  
a division of labour that allowed cells to 
specialize and become more successful together.  
But cooperation requires sacrifices. For 
a multicellular being to stay healthy,  
the wellbeing of the collective has to matter 
more than the survival of the individual cell.
Cancer cells stop being part of the 
collective and become individuals again.  
Your body can handle a few rogue cells but 
some cancer cells divide, again, and again,  
becoming a sort of new organism within 
you. Taking resources you need to survive,  
competing for the space you inhabit, destroying 
the organs they were part of in the process.
Despite the harm they cause, cancer cells 
are not evil. They don’t want to hurt you.  
They don’t want anything. Cells are protein 
robots that just follow their programming,  
which unfortunately has been corrupted.
The Soul of the Cell
In a nutshell, your cells have a nucleus filled 
with DNA. It consists of genes – instructions  
for how to build proteins and when to make 
each one.These building instructions are  
copied and transferred to ribosomes, where 
they are used to make proteins. What kind  
of proteins your cells make determine what 
they can do. The important thing here is  
that a corrupt gene means you get a corrupt 
protein, which will get important later.
Your DNA gets a tiny bit corrupted – it 
mutates – tens of thousands of times each day.  
Most of the time without any 
special cause, just by being alive.  
Almost all of these mutations are fixed 
very quickly or are not problematic.
Still, over time as your cells 
make copies of themselves,  
damage is accumulating. Imagine having 
to make copies from copies from copies,  
for decades. Maybe one day a hair got 
on the scanner or a corner got frayed.  
Each new mistake becomes part of the new 
copies and all the copies that follow.
You can increase DNA damage by doing 
things like smoking, drinking alcohol,  
by being obese, breathing in asbestos, by 
not using sunscreen or contracting a virus  
like HPV. But the simplest way to damage DNA 
and get cancer is to be alive long enough.  
For many cancer cases, there is 
no cause other than bad luck.
The Damage that leads to Cancer
We are simplifying, but roughly,  
there are three categories of genes that 
need to be corrupted so cancer can arise.
The first key mutation is in the appropriately 
named tumor suppressor genes, or TSGs.  
These genes are a bunch of things. For 
one, they produce control mechanisms that  
continuously scan your DNA for mistakes 
and copying errors and fix them right  
away. And then they keep normal cells from 
multiplying recklessly. If TSGs become damaged,  
your cells basically forget how to repair 
themselves and can reproduce unchecked.
The second crucial mutation can happen in your 
oncogenes. When oncogenes are turned on the  
cell is told to multiply rapidly.They were super 
active when you were inside your mother’s womb.  
To turn a single original cell into 
trillions in months, it needs to divide  
and grow rapidly. These rapid growth genes 
are turned off when there is enough of you.  
When your oncogenes get corrupted, 
they basically turn on again.
The third crucial mutation is 
in your cells’ suicide switch.  
Most cells are constantly recycled and refreshed. 
When cells amass too much damage, they usually  
notice and special genes trigger a controlled 
suicide called apoptosis. If the genes that  
control this process get damaged, cells are free 
to live on despite being dangerously corrupted.
So if a cell becomes unable to fix 
the mistakes in its genetic code,  
loses the ability to destroy itself 
when it notices the damage, and begins  
to grow rapidly without restraint, 
it turns into a young cancer cell.
These cells have to be killed as quickly as 
possible: while they are bad at this stage,  
they are still pretty weak and easy to 
kill. But if they continue to mutate and  
increase in number, they can learn to avoid 
your defenses and become a real threat. 
At any moment of your life, your immune 
system is hunting these cells. But how do  
you identify and kill corrupted cells that 
seem indistinguishable from healthy ones?
How to Find Cancer
Well, here we come back to the proteins your 
cells produce and the story they tell. So if  
for example, your oncogenes switch back 
on, they make oncogene proteins. Your  
immune system knows that they should 
not be present if you are an adult.
So to know which cells are 
corrupt and which are healthy,  
your immune system needs to know what proteins 
they are making inside. To solve this evolution  
came up with MHC class I molecules, a sort of 
display window that makes cells transparent.
Cells constantly take little samples of 
the proteins they make and put them into  
thousands of these MHC molecules, 
to showcase what they are doing.  
The selection is constantly refreshed, 
always giving an up to date picture.
There is a whole library of proteins that 
are highly dangerous and should not be made  
by healthy cells, and your immune system has them 
all on file. It has billions of specialized cells,  
called T Cells, made to recognize specific 
proteins. If a T Cell sees a forbidden protein  
in an MHC display window, it knows that the 
cell is corrupted and kills it immediately.
But there is a flaw in this system.
What if a cancer cell mutates and finds 
a way to circumvent this process? All it  
needs to do is to stop making MHC Class 
I molecules, and boom, it’s invisible.  
Without display windows, the immune system 
is blind and can’t identify cancer anymore.
Fortunately evolution found an ingenious solution:  
The Natural Killer Cell. A 
judge, jury and executioner.
The Killer
At this very second, hundreds of millions of 
Natural Killer Cells are patrolling your body  
looking for cells that have already turned 
into cancer or are corrupted by a virus.
Natural Killer Cells go from cell to cell to 
check for one thing: Does a cell have MHC class  
I molecules? Does it have a display window and is 
it doing its duty of showing off what is going on  
inside itself? This is so amazing because it 
covers all of your bases: While T Cells look  
for the presence of the unexpected, something 
that should not be here, Natural Killer Cells  
look for the absence of the expected, the 
absence of something that should be here.
The logic is: if a cell does 
not have display windows,  
it wants to hide something. And a cell 
that hides something must be killed.
What makes the Natural Killer Cell even more 
metal, is that it is always in murder mode. It  
patrols your body, checking cell after 
cell with the intention of killing it.  
Your healthy cells have to convince it that they  
should not die today. And a way to do 
that is to have MHC class I molecules.
So in summary, almost all young cancer cells you 
will ever develop in your life will be killed  
by your immune system. Ok, but if your body is 
this prepared, why do we still get cancer? Well,  
sometimes cancer cells mutate more 
and get much better at fighting back.  
Cancer is a story of an arms race. An arms race 
that we will win eventually, maybe with the help  
of Natural Killer cells! Right now a number of 
therapies are beginning to show amazing promise,  
from cancer fighting vaccines, to engineered T 
Cells and even Natural Killer cells – we will  
look at these therapies in future videos. 
So the war is not won yet, but we are on  
to cancer and eventually it will be eliminated 
once and for all – maybe sooner than we think.
why is the ocean salty and rivers aren't
in fact most of the salt in the sea
comes from Rivers but how can that be it
all starts with ocean water heading out
on the journey warm surface water
evaporates the water vapor then Rises to
condense into clouds that sometimes get
carried over land where they rain down
again on their way down the water
droplets absorb CO2 and become slightly
acidic when they Splash onto stones and
soil they wash out sorts of minerals as
ions and feed them into rows from there
the salts travel to some lake or the
ocean where they can accumulate over
time after animals and plants Feast on
this mineral Buffet sodium and chloride
ions remain as leftovers you know them
assault it's responsible for the
salinity of ocean water because the
ocean deposits as much salt sediment on
the seafloor as Rivers feed into it the
salt level stays at a stable 35 grams
per liter on average rivers in turn do
not accumulate salt they simply deliver
the minerals in the little traces of
salt to the oceans and lakes what goes
in comes out
[Music]
the universe is magnificent and vast
hundreds of billions of galaxies
trillions of stars and even more planets
if even the tiniest fraction are
habitable then the universe should be
teeming with life and yet we see nothing
only vast emptiness
where is everyone else
[Music]
the answer to this riddle could be as
exciting as it is creepy
we are early born before almost all
other life but very soon this may change
not only might aliens appear they could
quickly surround us an irreversible
competition for the universe might be
about to begin
[Music]
while this video is based on scientific
papers we're presenting interesting
ideas based on little data and lots of
extrapolation so take them with a grain
of salt
okay we need to look at three essential
questions to understand the galactic
competition
one how fast can bacteria build
spaceships to become a star-faring
civilization Life as we know it needs to
master a number of very hard steps it
starts with dead stuff turning into the
building blocks of life
then it needs to organize into
self-contained cells those cells have to
learn to work together to form
multicellular organisms
this keeps going until complex creatures
with big brains learn to use tools and
language the civilization has to be
formed from cultures that value progress
and technological development and then
they need to actually venture out beyond
their home planet
on Earth life appeared basically as soon
as the oceans fought but then it took
two billion years to make the step from
single cells to multicellular organisms
and 2 billion more for us to appear
culture civilization and space travel
developed super quickly though do things
always take that long or was this
actually exceptionally fast also passing
One Step does not mean the next one is
guaranteed
multicellularity evolved over 25 times
independently on Earth but there's only
one species that builds spaceships
we don't know how many steps life needs
to pass and how long they take to give
rise to a technological civilization but
there are probably many and it's likely
that on trillions of planets life has
been trying for billions of years
since we don't see any other
technological civilizations out there it
might well be that we are a rare
exception we might be among the first or
even the first technological
civilization in the Milky Way
but this is just one piece of the puzzle
on top of that we may have just hit the
perfect time window why does Humanity
exist now
the universe is already 13.8 billion
years old but it's unlikely that many
other technological civilizations had a
chance to appear before us
because in the earlier universe life
would have had a pretty hard time to
emerge let alone Thrive because it was
such a hostile environment
early Stars constantly blew up galaxies
crashed into each other and supermassive
black holes vomited massive amounts of
radiation enough to sterilize galaxies
over and over again
our son was born right at the end of
this Cosmic death show the universe has
never been more welcoming to life than
it is now
so Humanity has arrived at a very
convenient spot in time maybe the
earliest reasonably possible for life to
thrive
what about the future the sun burns
brighter than 90 percent of the stars in
our galaxy and will keep getting
brighter in about a billion years it
will boil all of Earth's oceans and then
become a giant that swallows it whole
so in the galactic context the sun is
very short-lived most stars are red
dwarfs that can sustain habitable
planets for tens of trillions of years
life on these planets has an incredibly
long time window to appear and pass the
heart steps
even knowing nothing about how rare or
common life is this makes it way more
likely for technological civilizations
to appear sometime in the future than in
the past
because if civilizations appear at
random in the Milky Way within a Time
window of a trillion years then very few
if any would appear before today
then a couple more arrive in this period
of a billion years that we're in before
all starfaring civilizations that could
ever exist emerge altogether
this weird tsunami-like distribution is
the result of both the hard steps model
and something else
a sort of deadline for any space-faring
civilization
any civilization coming after will find
it hard to have room to survive so all
potential life has to cram in before it
Humanity exists now because otherwise we
might have missed this deadline what or
who creates this deadline
why aren't aliens already on Earth
humans are curious expansionist and
hungry for energy
we've spread over the world and made it
our own our technology has been
improving over time first slowly then
breathtakingly fast
if these things don't change drastically
and our descendants want to prosper they
will expand into space
we could construct a Dyson swarm for
Endless energy and transform planets
into new homes we could cross
Interstellar distances allowing us to
reach for planets around distant Stars
if we have the motivation we can become
a Galactic Civilization
a civilization that does this sort of
stuff can be called Loud because its
activity creates noise signs that can be
detected from far away imagine someone
in a forest cutting down trees starting
fires and laying down roads the more
intense their work the easier they are
to notice an expanding technological
civilization would probably be hard to
miss our telescopes would pick up all
that energy and we would clearly
identify artificial interference with
stars and planets
another consequence of this business is
that it's very disruptive to the
environment
clearing a forest means the end of its
Wildlife human activity has left no
chance for a squirrel civilization to
appear
not because we hated squirrels it's
something that the thought that they
might want to do that at some point
never crossed our minds and we needed
wood
similarly if loud civilizations were
running around the galaxy in the past
terraforming planets or harvesting the
energy of stars they may have prevented
our existence had aliens started
colonizing Earth while we were still
sludging the oceans that sludge would
never have turned into humans
this is how loud aliens create a
deadline for new civilizations appearing
the Galaxy may have trillions of years
to create life but there may only be a
short window for it to spread and thrive
even if a loud civilization respects
planets with naturally occurring life
and expands around them like humans do
with Wildlife reserves any civilization
on such a planet would not be able to
expand ever
trapped Forever on a tiny Island
but here we are so loud aliens will
probably never hear
what about aliens that don't expand they
would be quiet aliens they're probably
limited to one star system and don't
have a noticeable impact on their Cosmic
surroundings humanity is like this right
now we wouldn't be able to detect
ourselves from the other side of the
Milky Way
if they stay quiet forever maybe because
of their culture or abilities then they
are not really a concern for us
we only have one sample to draw from
humanity and right now we are on the
path to becoming loud
if we're not special lands succeed
anyway then any other civilization with
the motivation and resources to would
eventually expand Beyond its planet of
origin
okay what are the consequences of all
these assumptions and ideas
[Music]
grave consequences race to the Stars
if we are really early then eventually
others will catch up with us
civilizations will emerge all over the
place and these new aliens will look at
space see no signs of life and come to
the same conclusion they exist because
loud civilizations have not yet taken
over everything but it only takes one
loud civilization to crowd them out of
the entire galaxy
they like us will face an important
decision do they stay quiet take it easy
and turn to their planet for as long as
possible or do they start expanding to
take a chunk of the Galaxy before
someone else arrives
meeting others does not necessarily mean
War or conflict but it means that new
borders will arise limits that may
persist forever
in the worst case a civilization could
be completely enveloped by the empires
of others
eternally doomed to be a galactic
Backwater without control over their
fate
so if we want a seat at the galactic
adults table we best get to work if we
really are early we have an incredible
opportunity to mold thousands or even
millions of planets according to our
vision and dreams
and one day when we meet others we can
greet them and meet them as equals
wouldn't that be nice
if you want to explore the vast Universe
from the comfort of your own home we've
got a lot of amazing Space and Science
inspired products for you all of our
products are designed and produced with
love and care by us here at kotskazakhs
they're an integral part of the science
story we try to tell so start your
journey on our Channel and continue it
with one of our posters notebooks or
plushes every purchase directly funds
what we do on this channel
thank you so much for your support and
never stop dreaming of Space Adventures
[Music]
In 2023 Kurzgesagt has existed for 10 years, 
insanely long in internet years. We are among the  
largest sciency channels on Youtube and still a 
bit of a black box to people. So let us talk about  
ourselves a bit in three parts: Our backstory, how 
we finance our work and the values of Kurzgesagt!
Let’s jump to a more innocent time.
From humble beginnings to Today
Kurzgesagt’s foundation was laid when Philipp, our 
founder, dropped out of high school as a teenager.  
Learning seemed daft and useless and he was not 
interested in anything. Until a very special  
teacher at a school for dropouts grabbed him 
by the neck. The way she taught was different.  
She talked about connections and the big picture. 
She told a story. For the first time ever,  
Philipp wanted to learn more without being 
forced. It was a key life experience.
Kurzgesagt tries to recreate this 
experience for you. Nothing is  
boring if you tell a good story 
and we try to tell these stories,  
to spark excitement and make you 
want to go on and learn more.
Because of the one teacher that could do 
this, Philipp got a high school degree,  
studied history and design and eventually 
started Kurzgesagt as a passion project,  
inspired by Crash Course World history.
In 2012 Youtube was less commercial and more 
idealistic. You couldn’t make a living with  
videos as involved as ours and that was fine. 
The goal was creative freedom and so for the  
first few years, it actually cost money to 
make Kurzgesagt. We had no outside funding,  
just intrinsic motivation and a few friends from 
university. We worked for clients during the day  
and on Kurzgesagt at night, 80-100 hours a week. 
It was a real struggle but also very rewarding.
But then Patreon launched, sponsorships 
started, our views increased, Youtube  
changed. In 2015 the channel began to 
break even and then to earn a profit.  
But we were pretty burned out at this 
point, so we decided to bring in more  
friends and hire the first team members 
full time, creating a legal entity.
More people meant that we could stop overworking, 
do more and improve. But we also needed to earn  
more; the livelihood of real humans depended 
upon it. None of us had any experience in  
running a company. We didn’t plan to become 
big or to grow – it sorta just happened.
A decade later Kurzgesagt is 
not a small project anymore. 
We are an animation studio, with offices 
in Munich and Berlin. We need computers,  
monitors, tablets, desks, coffee, contracts, 
pay licences, taxes, rent and insurance.
In 2023 our team consists of over 60 full 
employees and a lot of freelancers around  
the world. Salaries alone cost millions 
of dollars a year, just to stay around.
This creates an interesting problem: 
with such high production costs, 
how can we publish our work for free?
How we finance Kurzgesagt
We have added up our earnings from 2015 through 
2022. Our sources of funding change depending on  
opportunities and the state of the world. Early 
on, agency work was our main source of income,  
ad revenue varies, in some years we got 
more sponsorships than in others. The shop  
didn’t exist for a long time, then it became 
pretty big after we launched our calendar.
62% of our revenue comes 
indirectly or directly from you:  
You watch our videos with ads, support 
us on Patreon or buy from our shop.
The single biggest source of income by far, is 
our shop that alone accounted for 40% over the  
last 8 years. The shop started small but once we 
published our calendar for the first time in 2016,  
we realised it could really help us do more 
things and we started producing more and  
more science products, from our posters to our 
gratitude journal or universe scented candles.  
YouTube ads accounted for 13% and Patreon 9%. 
So without your support we would cease to exist.
Our shop and Patreon are our most important 
sources of revenue, and because we see ourselves  
as science communicators – we don’t just do 
merch, but sciency products that we spend  
hundreds of hours researching, discussing with 
experts, polishing up and working on directly  
with the manufacturers. They are part of the 
science story we try to tell. It also just feels  
good to get directly funded by you guys and give 
you something back for it, on top of our videos.  
YouTube ads are a crucial part of our funding 
as well, but they are not within our control.
Then there is paid agency work, which we 
stopped doing in 2022 – it accounted for  
9% of our revenue over the last 8 years. A 
lot in the beginning, not much by the end.
Then there are commercial sponsors 
advertising products -they accounted  
for 12% of our revenue. We also 
got about 7% from German Public  
Broadcasting for the German Channel, 
but ended this partnership in 2022.
Finally there are institutional sponsors 
representing about 10%. Some people take  
issue with this – especially Bill Gates has come 
under public scrutiny, and we’ve been criticised  
for even working with organisations funded by 
him. So let us look at this 10% in more detail:
About 3% of our revenue over the 
last eight years came from the Gates  
organisations for a wide variety 
of topics, often suggested by us.
5% comes from Open Philanthropy and is only 
used for specific projects. With these funds,  
we have started Arabic, Hindi, Korean, Japanese, 
Portuguese, and French channels, bringing more  
free science content to more people. Then there is 
a two-year funding for original Tik Tok content,  
which gives us freedom to explore and learn 
how to do short form science communication.
The final 2% came from other organisations 
like the red cross or the UN for example.
We choose institutional sponsors 
carefully but if organisations  
want to fund videos that help us spread 
quality information about relevant topics,  
this is an easy yes for us, if we have 
the capacity for it. On top of that,  
the institutional sponsors we are 
working with align with our values.
We have contracts with every grant giver or 
sponsor that bars them from editorial influence,  
other than suggesting topic areas like 
“global health” or “climate change”.  
We agree on video topics together, but 
sponsors can neither influence details, nor  
our conclusions. The final decision always remains 
with us. And usually, we develop the topics of the  
videos autonomously and tell the sponsor what 
we are doing afterwards. If you are interested  
in how we research our videos in detail, our 
head of research wrote an article about it.
Running an educational youtube channel is a 
balancing act that we take very seriously. We  
are doing our best to maintain this balance, 
adjusting whenever necessary. As a team and  
company we want to grow to give more people 
access to a science based outlook on the world.
This brings us to our final topic 
– why are we doing Kurzgesagt?
Our Values and Our Vision
Our core mission is to spark curiosity. We 
want to make science and humanism accessible  
for as many people as possible. The effort 
we put into creating our videos is a way of  
achieving that – our videos are beautiful 
because that helps to spark curiosity,  
to understand complex topics, and because 
it just feels good to create and watch.
Our research is as intensive as it is 
so our videos are a good simplification  
of very complicated topics. We want 
to make people excited about science  
so they rediscover subjects they hated 
in school and see how amazing they are.
On top of curiosity, we want to inspire long term 
thinking and a positive, constructive outlook.  
Being optimistic about the future of humanity 
is not mainstream and we think this is horrible.  
Pessimism often sounds smart and 
gets more views while optimism can  
sound naive but this is a bias that 
is not helpful for us as a species.  
So despite the gloominess of many topics, 
we want to approach them with informed and  
well researched optimism – not brushing 
humanity's very real challenges aside,  
but also not falling into the trap of pessimism. 
We want to inspire you to dream a little about  
the glorious future that we could actually 
build – but only if we believe it is possible.
In the long run we don’t only want to do this 
on Youtube. The idea is for Kurzgesagt to be a  
positive influence across more media. On our 
Tik Tok channel, in the long form content we  
are exploring, in apps, in the VR game that will 
be released later this year and the games we plan  
to make in the future. Our shop is a central part 
of this vision: we start our stories with a video  
and end them with a pos
ter.
There are so many things we want to do. And 
thanks to you watching this right now, we have  
the freedom to work to the best of our knowledge 
and ability. In the end, we hope you like what  
we offer and that we will be doing something 
worthwhile for as long as we exist. And hopefully,  
we’ll have a lasting impact by making science and 
learning more fun for as many people as possible.
If you personally want to help us do this, you can 
watch and share our videos, check out our shop,  
become a patreon or give us an ad blocker 
exception. We exist because of you and  
you have no idea how much we appreciate that 
you are here. And hopefully we are less of a  
black box now. In any case. Doing Kurzgesagt 
for a decade has been a pretty crazy ride.  
So from the whole team – Thank you so 
much for being with us all these years.
There is this idea floating around that what
doesn’t kill you, makes you stronger.
That surviving a disease leaves you better
off.
And it seems to make sense because we have
all experienced this.
When you go through hardship, often you come
out more resilient, more ready to face a difficult
situation in the future.
But it turns out that sometimes, what doesn’t
kill you makes you weaker.
So, what happens when you get sick?
The Machinery of War
Think of yourself as a large country, with
a sizable army to defend it.
You are surrounded by enemies that want to
take your land, your energy, your resources.
This is a matter of life and death, so your
body evolved to be sensitive to damage and
to the presence of enemies.
Because this means that an invasion might
happen at any moment and that it has to act
fast.
Let us start an invasion and see what happens.
The moment your cells notice that something
is off, they release an onslaught of signal
proteins called cytokines.
They are like air raid sirens that activate
all sorts of immune cells, that then themselves
release many more cytokines, amplifying the
alarm.
Soon you are flooded with signals that trigger
precautions and counter-measures.
Mobilization is under way.
Your brain activates sickness behavior and
reorganizes your body's priorities to defense.
The first thing you notice is that your energy
level drops and you get sleepy.
You feel apathetic, often anxious or down
and you lose your appetite.
Your sensitivity to pain is heightened and
you seek out rest.
All of this serves to save your energy and
reroute it into your immune response.
You become a country under attack switching
into a war economy, because properly activating
your immune system is intensely disruptive
and draining.
Just like war is expensive for a country as
industry switches to building tanks, your
immune system demands huge amounts of energy,
amino acids and micro elements to build its
weapons.
Take fever: it speeds up your metabolism and
makes your cells work harder and faster, while
creating heat that is pretty stressful for
many invaders – but it uses up a lot of
calories to maintain.
Then your immune system begins to clone millions
of specialized immune cells to respond specifically
to the enemy infecting you.
B Cells produce millions of antibodies every
second, each requiring hundreds of amino acids
to construct.
Billions or even trillions of proteins need
to be made to refresh the complement system,
a minefield inside your blood.
Cytokines, the mobilisation and information
signals, also need constant refreshing.
Usually you acquire your resources by eating.
But when you are sick, your body slows down
your digestion because it needs a lot of energy
you can’t spare.
So it reaches for the easiest source of amino
acids and starts breaking down your muscles.
All that muscle that you worked so hard for
is sacrificed to keep you alive.
If you are young and healthy and fit, you
will make up for that quickly once you are
better.
But if you are old or very young, weak or
suffer from chronic illness, this may be way
too draining.
Your body is literally consuming itself to
keep the defense going.
If your whole system is already strained,
when you get sick, just keeping your immune
responses going can overwhelm your capacities.
Your Immune System is a Jerk.
Our enemies too.
Your immune system is as dangerous to you
as it is to enemies.
There is a very fragile balance between the
damage caused by an infection and the collateral
damage caused by immune cells.
One of your first responders are Neutrophils
– imagine crazy aggressive chimps with machine
guns.
If a Neutrophil encounters enemies it showers
them with chemicals that cut them open but
can also damage civilian cells, especially
if the patient is already compromised, for
example by smoking.
On top of that the microorganisms that invade
you often release chemicals and toxins that
can cause significant damage and cell death.
So a serious infection often causes many tiny
wounds, literally holes in your organs.
As you can imagine it is not great to have
holes and wounds in your organs, and your
body rushes to close them.
Your Neutrophils and Macrophages help by releasing
chemicals that signal the body to start repairs,
and most of the damage is quickly filled up
with regrowing cells.
But others are filled with collagen, a sort
of fix-all organic cement that gives your
gooey tissue structural integrity.
You have seen the result on your skin as scars.
A scar is different from the original tissue.
It has no functioning cells in it, it is like
a sloppily applied cement patch.
It can’t do what the original tissue was
doing.
A scar on your heart makes it beat a tiny
bit weaker.
A scar on the lungs no longer captures oxygen.
A scar on your liver makes it a worse filter.
And so, as you go through life and survive
serious disease after serious disease, the
functionality of your organs may decrease.
This damage is usually small enough not to
affect your quality of life – but can be
permanent.
Ok, this sounds depressing, but there is actually
something you can do to avoid a lot of this
damage and train your immune system!
The best way to train your Immune System
Your immune system is unique.
Everyone has a slightly different immune system
that’s stronger against some enemies and
weaker against others.
Which makes evolutionary sense, as this protects
our species from being wiped out by a single
infection.
Collectively, the immune system of the human
species is a spectrum: most people respond
well enough to an infection, a few are super-responders
and a few don't respond well and die.
Some people survived the black death, are
more resistant to HIV or Corona virus or even
resistant against Ebola.
Others are killed easily by the flu or highly
vulnerable to certain bacterial infections.
Where you are on this spectrum is impossible
to predict.
And you also respond differently to every
possible infection.
This is why seemingly very healthy young people
died from Covid while for some elderly people
it was more like a mild flu.
The idea that you can weather all sorts of
diseases if you never get a cold is wrong.
You never know what your immune system is
good at until it is tested.
Getting sick is a gamble in life’s casino
with your health on the line.
Always.
But there is something you can do: hacking
one of the best features of your immune system.
When you survive a disease, usually you have
better defenses against it afterwards – you
gain memory cells that are very good at killing
the specific enemy you fought that day.
So you either don’t get the disease again
or the next infection is much milder.
And you can use an incredible achievement
of human ingenuity that taps into this mechanism
to prevent damage from disease and train your
immune system: Vaccines.
Vaccines basically pretend to be a disease
and train your defenses to be ready if it
ever shows up for real.
The goal is to create the same memory cells
that you would get after surviving an infection.
But if you can feel some side effects, why
should you still do it?
Nature Vs Vaccine Dojo
You have two options to train your immune
system: Vaccine Dojo and nature dojo.
In vaccine dojo you train with paper weapons
and learn to defend yourself.
Sure, you might get a black eye or a bruise.
Sometimes after a vaccine, you get sick for
a few days, but that’s generally it.
No scars, no permanent damage.
We discussed vaccine side effects in detail
in another video if you want to learn more.
On the other hand, getting a disease to become
immune means going to a nature dojo.
In nature dojo, you train with real weapons,
sharp knives and swords.
Things might still work out, but with way
more cuts and wounds.
But from time to time someone will die, be
it a kid from measles or an adult from influenza.
Nature dojo is just way more risky.
On top of that, the immunity you get from
a vaccine is often better than the natural
resistance, because they are engineered to
engage your immune system in a more productive
way.
Of course vaccines are not magic and sometimes
they do not protect us as well as we’d like
them to.
Maybe because an enemy mutates too quickly,
like the Omicron coronavirus, or because your
specific immune system does not respond well
to the vaccine and builds less of a defense.
Still, being vaccinated is one of the best
tools to train your natural defenses.
In the end, if we look at the stunning progress
humanity has made in the last century, eventually
we may overcome disease for good.
But until then we can do our best to take
care of ourselves and others - your body and
your older self will be grateful to you.
Diseases are not the only problem humanity
can address if we work together.
We believe the same is true for climate change,
one of the main challenges of our generation.
We are very passionate about this topic and
we have covered it extensively in previous
videos.
Humanity needs to tackle this problem on different
levels of society, from governments and economies
down to the individual.
And there’s one way you can take action
now – by working with our friends from Wren,
who help you offset your carbon emissions.
By visiting wren.co and answering a few questions
you can find out what your personal carbon
footprint is.
Your first step should be reducing your footprint
– but there are limits to that.
Wren lets you offset the rest of your carbon
footprint with a monthly subscription that
supports projects that plant trees, protect
rainforests, and remove carbon dioxide from
the sky.
We think it's one of many puzzle pieces that
can make a real difference in the climate
crisis.
Once you sign up to make a monthly contribution
you’ll get pictures and updates from the
project you support, so you can directly see
the impact you are making.
We appreciate Wren’s focus on transparency
and impact, so you can always retrace how
your money is spent.
One project we find especially interesting
is Refrigerant Destruction — Old refrigerators
use harmful gases as a coolant.
These gases, once released into the atmosphere,
cause global warming thousands of times faster
than CO2.
Wren’s project permanently destroys containers
filled with these gases—proving, with high
certainty, that they’ll never leak and contribute
to global warming.
Sign up through wren.co/kurzgesagt to start
helping the planet.
As climate change is close to our hearts we
will personally pay for the first month of
subscription for the first 200 people to sign
up!
Continue your kurzgesagt journey into the
fascinating world of the immune system and
check out these products on our shop.
Learn more about immune cells and marvel at
the battles that are fought in your body everyday.
All of our products are designed with love
and produced with care by us here at kurzgesagt.
look around the room you're sitting in
right now let's fill it top to bottom
with trillions of grains of sand
billions of grains of rice hundreds of
thousands of grapes a few thousand
apples and a dozen watermelons this is
what the inside of your cells looks like
in terms of numbers they're mostly
filled up with water molecules the
grains of sand
water gives the cells insides the
consistency of soft jelly and enables
other things to move around easily
almost all the other things the rice and
fruit are proteins several billion in
total more than ten thousand different
kinds depending on the function of the
cell
your cells are basically protein robots
as is all life really
in fact all solid non-fat parts of your
body are mostly made out of protein even
your bones
proteins are dead things that make life
happen
how does this work the language of life
cells need to do many very hard things
to stay alive get food in and waste out
grow and build structures Escape danger
or react to stimuli make copies of
themselves and so on all of this is done
by speaking the language of life and the
words of this language are proteins this
is how this language Works in a nutshell
it all begins with amino acids tiny
organic molecules
they're the alphabet of the language of
life there are 21 different ones like
different letters
amino acid a amino acid b c and so on
if you put around 50 amino acids
together they form a protein which in
the language of life is a word and if
you put many of these protein words
together you get a sentence called a
biological pathway let's oversimplify a
bit and say for example your cell needs
to break down sugar with the language of
life it may take the amino acids for the
letters b r e a and K to form the
protein word break
then combine this word with other
protein words to form a biological
pathway sentence that means break down
sugar
in reality this language of life is so
complex that it defies imagination you
need to know about 8 000 words to speak
a human language really well but in the
language of life there are an estimated
twenty thousand and while the average
English word has five letters human
proteins have an average of 375 amino
acids the longest protein has more than
thirty thousand
and cells need to execute thousands of
steps at any moment if they ever stop
speaking the language of Life they die
okay but how do Mindless cells speak a
language this complex
let's dive a little deeper there are 21
amino acids that can be combined to form
proteins
and proteins are made up of dozens to
hundreds to thousands of amino acids for
the average protein length of a human
cell of 375 amino acids you get a
stunning 6.8 times 10 to the power of
495 possible proteins your cells can
make a quadrillion Google Google Google
times more than there are atoms in the
universe
most of these possible proteins are
useless just like with human language
most random letter combinations are just
gibberish so you need to know which
words which proteins make up a language
to speak it properly
and this is the job of your DNA a long
sequence of instructions
if you untangle the cell's DNA it would
be about two meters long all of your
body's DNA combined into one long string
would reach to the Sun and back over 20
times
around one percent of your DNA is made
up of genes which are basically protein
dictionaries that contain all the words
of the language of Life your cells speak
but genes are also the building manuals
for all the proteins your cells need to
function the rest of your DNA is
probably not useless but basically like
a set of rules it's like the book of
grammar of the language of Life which
proteins need to be built at which time
how many of them do you need which
protein words go together and why
okay letters words sentences dictionary
and grammar but of course this is all
just a metaphor for something
mind-numbingly complex let's dive a
little deeper to catch a glimpse of
reality
how dead proteins make life
now that we have some basic principles
we have a chance to understand how dead
things make life together and for that
we need a fundamental force of the
universe electromagnetism
the elementary particles that make up
atoms which make up amino acids have
different charges that attract or repair
each other the 21 different amino acids
all have slightly different charges
some are more negative others more
positive
when your cells build proteins they put
different amino acids together in Chains
basically long strings now because of
the different charges of the amino acids
used these strings begin to fold in on
themselves this folding process is so
complex that we still haven't completely
understood how exactly it works but in a
nutshell 1D strings become 3D structures
proteins are basically 3D puzzle pieces
with a very specific shape in the world
of proteins shape is everything because
its 3D shape determines which areas of a
protein are charged in which way and
this determines how it can interact with
other proteins
all of these differently charged puzzle
pieces can snap together or repeat each
other
when they snap together their charge
changes which can make them change their
shape which then makes them a new
protein a new tool that can do new
things
this is what makes proteins so
incredibly powerful you can do basically
everything with them they can snap
together like Lego pieces to build
complex structures they can dismantle
things they can form complex micro
machines that use energy to do work and
maybe most stunningly they can convey
information let's say there's a toxic
chemical entering your cell there may be
a protein shapes to snap to that toxin
if the protein finds that toxin it
changes its shape with that new shape it
can now snap into a different protein
that changes its shape again this new
protein activates a micro machine that
directly binds to your DNA to order the
production of a special protein which
acts as an antidote to the toxin
this Cascade of interaction is the
pathway we spoke about earlier a
sentence in the language of life
so without a single active thought
proteins have fixed a problem and saved
the cell's life in reality these
Pathways can have dozens to hundreds of
steps
our life operates is so incredibly
orange using
somehow mind-numbingly complex
interactions between dumb and dead
proteins create a less dumb and less
dead sound
somewhere around here life happens but
we still don't know what life is
how dumb things are smart together
we need another analogy so let's talk
about ants ants share a fundamental
property with cells they are really dumb
a single ant will just stumble around
uselessly but if you put a lot of ants
together they exchange information and
do amazing things constructing complex
structures organizing themselves caring
for Broods or attacking enemies
although dumb individually together they
become something greater this phenomenon
occurs all over nature and is called
emergence it's the observation that
entities have properties and abilities
that their parts do not have
this is how everything in your body
works your cells are bags of proteins
Guided by chemistry but together these
proteins form a living being that can do
a lot of really sophisticated things
cells are Mindless robots that are even
dumber than ants but many of them acting
together form specialized tissue and
organ systems from muscles that make
your heartbeat to brain cells that make
you think
if you look outside at the incredible
Dimension and scale of space a place
where forever is a real thing it's
almost impossible not to feel a bit
small not special but if you look inside
into what you really are you just
discover almost Indescribable complexity
the beautiful language of life
almost everything in the universe
reveals hidden layers of complexity if
you look closer and if you have the
knowledge to understand it to help you
with that we've created a series of
lessons to take your scientific
knowledge to the next level made in
collaboration with our friends at
brilliant.org these lessons give you a
deeper understanding of the topics from
our most popular videos from rabies and
mammalian metabolism to climate science
and black holes
brilliant is an Interactive Learning
tool that makes maths science and
computer science accessible with a
Hands-On approach because we know that
to really learn something you've got to
do it
think of each lesson as a one-on-one
tutoring version of a kotz gazard video
brilliant has thousands of other lessons
to explore as well from math space
topics like algebra and probability to
the concepts behind algorithms and
artificial intelligence if you liked the
biology discussed in this video
Brilliance course on computational
biology teaches you many important key
Concepts you'll learn about DNA
instructions RNA and protein folding
then learn how those concepts are used
to tackle modern challenges like genome
sequencing and human health to get
Hands-On with cutzark lessons and
explore everything Brilliance has to
offer you can start your free 30-day
trial by signing up at brilliant.org
nutshell there's even an extra perk for
Cutz art viewers the first 200 people to
use the link get 20 off an annual
membership once their trial ends we love
seeing how the gears interlock with our
search brilliant gives you the tools to
understand how everything fits together
the story of the human cell continues
with our human cell poster a visually
stunning Deep dive into the intricate
workings of the smallest unit of life
like all the sciency things in our shop
it's designed with love and produce with
Care by us here at kotskazakt
thank you
[Music]
black hole Stars may have been the
largest stars that ever existed they
burned brighter than galaxies and were
larger than any Star today or that could
ever exist in the future but besides
their scale what makes them special and
weird is that deep inside they were
occupied by a cosmic parasite an
endlessly hungry black hole how is that
even possible
foreign
[Music]
black hole Stars take the weirdness of
black holes and go beyond to break
everything we know about how stars form
and grow they were only possible during
a short window of time in the early
universe but if they existed they would
solve one of the largest mysteries of
cosmology
black hole stars were excessive anywhere
you look at them the most massive stars
today may have about 300 solar masses a
black hole Star had up to 10 million
solar masses of nearly pure hydrogen
let's take a moment to look at what this
means visually
the sun wesen Al pegasi the largest star
and finally the black hole star
its scale is beyond words
over 800 000 times wider than our sun
380 times larger than the largest star
we know today
and Far Below its surface is a black
hole growing rapidly as it devours
billions upon billions of tons of matter
per second
normally Stars Are Born from gigantic
clouds collections of thousands or
millions of solar masses of mostly
hydrogen in these clouds Mata starts to
accumulate around the densest spots
inside
as these spots get denser their
gravitational pull intensifies and they
grow faster
eventually they generate so much heat
and pressure that they ignite Fusion
reactions and a new star is born
but this puts a limit on their size
nuclear fusion releases enough radiation
energy that the surrounding gas cloud is
blown away the new baby star can't
gather more mass
from now on the star is living on the
edge between two forces gravity pulling
in trying to squash the star and
radiation created by Fusion pushing
outwards trying to blow the star apart
after millions or billions of years the
core runs out of fuel and the balance
breaks destroying the star
but black hole stars were very very
different
the beasts of the other universe
few hundred million years after the big
bang when the universe was much smaller
all the matter in existence was much
more concentrated
the universe was much denser and hotter
Dark Matter was a dominant player
forming giant structures called Dark
Matter halos
these dark matter Halos were so massive
that they pulled in and concentrated
unimaginably gigantic amounts of
hydrogen gas becoming the birthplaces of
the first stars and galaxies
epic clouds of hydrogen fought some as
massive as 100 Million Suns more than
the mass of small galaxies in this
unique environment that will never exist
again the enormous gravitational pull of
the Dark Matter Halos Drew gas into its
Center and created extremely massive
stars as we said before when A Star is
Born it blows away the gas cloud that
created it but these Titanic gas clouds
in the early Universe were so large and
massive that even after their birth more
and more gas piled on the newborn star
making it grow to unbelievable
proportions
the young star is forced to grow and
grow and grow getting more and more
massive until in some cases it reaches
up to 10 million times the mass of our
sun
crushed by gravity its core gets hotter
and hotter desperately pushing outwards
trying to blow itself apart but to no
avail
there's too much mass and too much
pressure the balance is impossible to
uphold
like a supernova run fast forward the
core gets crushed into a black hole
normally that would be the end today
stars go supernova a black hole forms
and things calm down but in this case
the star survives its own death
a tremendous explosion rocks the star
from the inside but it's not enough the
star is so large and massive but not
even a supernova can destroy it but now
it has a black hole for a heart
it's tiny a few tens of kilometers in
the center of a thing the size of the
solar system
the monster grows
Stars Are Born from ever fastest
spinning and collapsing gas and so they
also spin when a black hole is born from
the core of a star it keeps its angular
momentum this means that matter that
gets drawn in doesn't just fall in a
straight line but instead begins
orbiting the black hole in smaller and
smaller circles going faster and faster
the result is an accretion disc where
gas orbits at nearly the speed of light
only a small amount of gas actually
falls in at any given moment basically
black holes put a lot of food on the
table and only nibble at it but the
matter trapped in the accretion disk
doesn't have a good time friction and
collisions between particles heated up
to temperatures of millions of degrees
actively feeding black holes have
accretion discs that are incredibly hot
and Powerful
this heat from the disc further
restricts how much a black hole can
devour just like the core of stars the
super hot material creates radiation
that blows away most of the food within
its reach so even if a black hole had
access to as much food as it desired it
can only grow slowly
a black hole embedded inside a black
hole star is different the enormous
pressure surrounding it pushes down
matter directly into the black hole
overcoming all restrictions on how fast
it can consume
this process is so violent and releases
so much energy that the accretion disc
becomes hotter and releases more
radiation pressure than any star core
ever could
enough to push back against the weight
of 10 million Suns
an impossibly dangerous balance has been
created millions of sodomasses pushing
in the angry radiation of a force-fed
black hole pushing out
for the next few million years the black
hole star is consumed from within the
black hole grows to thousands of solar
masses and the bigger it gets the faster
it eats which heats up the star even
more and causes it to expand
in its Final Phase the black hole star
has become over 30 times wider than our
solar system truly the largest star to
ever exist in the universe
the intense magnetic fields at its core
spew out Jets of plasma from the black
hole's poles which Pierce through the
star and shoot out into space turning it
into a cosmic Beacon it must have been
one of the most or inducing sites to
ever exist in the universe
but this also marks the ant it becomes
too stretched and the accretion disc
within too powerful
the parasite destroys its host blowing
it apart
a black hole with the mass of one
hundred thousand suns reps its way out
to hunt for new prey while leaving
behind nothing but a star carcass
the supermassive question
if black hole Stars existed they could
explain one of the greatest Mysteries of
the universe
the supermassive black holes we see at
the center of galaxies are just too big
they shouldn't be possible
black holes born from regular supernovas
can be a few tens of solar masses at
most
and because of the process we explained
before they grow slowly after that if
black holes merge they can form slightly
larger black holes of over a hundred
solar masses
it should take billions and billions of
years to make black holes with hundreds
of thousands or even millions of solar
masses
and yet we know that some supermassive
black holes already had 800 million
solar masses only 690 million years
after the big bang
black hole stars are a sort of black
hole cheat code if they formed very
early in our universe and the black
holes that emerged from them were
thousands of solar masses then they
could be the seeds for supermassive
black holes
these seeds could take root in the
center of the earliest galaxies merging
with others and drawing in enough matter
to grow quickly and reliably
very soon we may be able to verify their
past existence the James Webb Space
Telescope is turning its senses to
explore the farthest reaches of the
universe looking back in time back to
the early universe that we couldn't see
before
so with luck we might be able to witness
glimpses of these tragic Titans in the
brief moment between their formation and
destruction
until then let's do the visual Journey
again just for fun
Stars a big black hole Stars bigger
[Music]
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
project like the James Webb Space
Telescope requires some serious
budgeting but even personal finances are
a nightmare to manage on your own that's
why we want to introduce you to Rocket
money the sponsor of today's video just
as space exploration projects are
planned by professionals your finances
deserve professional attention too
rocket money is an all-in-one Finance
platform that helps with managing
expenses and saving money you can use it
to cancel unwanted subscriptions lower
your bills create budgets monitor your
credit score and create smart savings
accounts the feature we like best is
canceling subscriptions the platform
identifies recurring charges and helps
you cancel the ones you no longer want
no need to go through long hold times
with customer service you just click
cancel within the app you can also
upload screenshots of bills that you
want to lower and Rocket money will get
to work negotiating your bill for you
join the 3.4 million members using
rocket money to optimize their Finance
answers and download the app today you
can get access to features like
budgeting for free and unlock all
features with a premium subscription
rocket money makes it easier than ever
to spend less and save more basically
managing your money doesn't have to be
rocket science
we know you've been waiting for a long
time let's reveal the next limited
edition pin it's our universe to scale
about 10 to the power of minus 35
seconds after the big bang the
observable universe was only the size of
a marble before it expanded pre-order is
available for only 72 hours so you can
order it now and then never again
add it to your PIN collection or start a
new one
pin number three will be revealed soon
and as the year 12022 is slowly coming
to an end just kidding time flies by way
too fast will take a short break to
recharge our batteries thanks to all of
you out there for all the love and
support
We Wish You a peaceful and cozy turn of
the Year see you back at Full Throttle
in January
wait
[Music]
foreign
[Music]
Mars is a disappointing hellhole lacking 
practically everything we need to stay  
alive. It looks like we’ll only ever have small 
crews spend a miserable time hidden underground.  
Except, we could terraform it into a green 
new world. But to solve the planet’s problems,  
we first need to make it worse and turn it 
into oceans of lava with gigantic lasers.
This isn’t a far-fetched science fiction tale. 
Terraforming Mars is possible, on the kind of  
time scale our ancestors built great monuments 
in. If humanity solves some of its pressing  
problems and ventures into space to expand into 
the solar system, this may not be that far off.
Ok. So how do we terraform Mars 
quickly? Well, It’s complicated.
Mars is dry and has no soil to grow anything. Its 
atmosphere is too thin to breathe or protect from  
radiation, giving you a high risk of cancer. 
So to turn it into a new home for humanity,  
we have to give it a proper atmosphere, similar 
to Earth’s. It should be made of 21% oxygen,  
79% nitrogen and a tiny bit of CO2, at an average 
temperature of 14°C and under 1 bar of pressure.
We have to create oceans and rivers and then the 
ground has to be weathered into fertile soil to  
host living things. Then we need to install 
a biosphere on the surface and prevent it all  
from being undone by installing protective 
measures that can stand the test of time.
It’s difficult. But a big 
laser makes it a lot easier.
Challenge 1: The Atmosphere
Some 4 billion years ago Mars had a nice 
oxygen-rich atmosphere and was home to vast  
oceans and rivers. It held onto it for 
several hundred million years before it  
got blown away. Ultraviolet rays broke down 
the atmospheric gases and then the oceans,  
until they were swept away by solar wind. 
Today Mars is a dry, barren wasteland.
Luckily a sizable portion of the water is frozen 
in deep reservoirs and in the polar ice caps,  
enough to create a very shallow ocean. 
And enormous amounts of oxygen are bound  
as minerals in the Martian rocks, 
like the oxygen in the iron oxides  
that give the planet its rust-red colour, 
as well as carbon dioxide in carbonates.
To free these gases, we need to 
reverse the reactions that lock  
them away by using thermolysis, 
which occurs at temperatures as  
high as on the surface of the Sun. In 
short, we want to melt Mars’ surface.
The best way to do that would be to put lasers 
in orbit aiming their beams down on Mars.  
The most powerful laser today is the ELI-NP,  
able to produce beams of 10 Petawatts 
of power, for a trillionth second.
To melt Mars we need a laser twice as powerful, 
that runs continuously. The easiest way is to use  
a solar-pumped laser that can be powered directly 
with sunlight: At its core are metal-infused glass  
rods that absorb energy and release it as a laser 
beam. If we build an array of mirrors in space,  
about 11 times the size of the United States, we 
can focus enough sunlight onto them to melt Mars.
Let’s do it!
As the lasers hit the surface, about 750 
kg of oxygen and some carbon dioxide emerge  
from every cubic meter of rock melted. If 
we are efficient our lasers only need to  
melt through the top 8 meters of 
the surface to get enough oxygen.
It would look terrifying. The 
skies would be shrouded in storms,  
while the ground would glow red-hot, 
criss-crossed by currents of lava.  
Tireless laser beams sweep over the landscape, 
leaving trails too bright to look at. After they  
pass, the ground cools quickly. A strange 
snow falls: the ashes from all the elements  
that solidify as they cool down, like silicon and 
iron. Mars is still a cold planet at this point.
A happy side effect of this inferno is that 
all the water in the polar ice caps and even  
deep underground rises into the sky as hot 
steam, forming clouds that rain down over  
the entire planet. They would wash out 
the nastier gases from the atmosphere,  
like chlorine, and carry away harmful elements 
that accumulated on the surface. In the end, they  
would form shallow oceans, saltier than on Earth. 
We might need to do an extra clean-up afterwards.
It would take about 50 years of continuous 
lasering to create our oxygen atmosphere. We  
could use this opportunity to dig deeper in some 
places to create the basins for salty oceans or  
rivers and spare some landmark features 
like Mons Olympus and Valles Marineris.
We’re not done though.
The resulting atmosphere is nearly 100% 
oxygen and only 0.2 bar. It’s hard to  
breathe and very flammable. To make 
it similar to earth and a lot safer,  
we need to add a lot of nitrogen, which 
Mars is lacking sadly. We have to import it.
The ideal source is Titan, a large moon of Saturn, 
covered in a thick atmosphere that’s almost  
entirely nitrogen. We just have to move 3000 
trillion tons from the outer solar system to Mars.
While that’s not easy, it is doable. To 
process that much of Titan’s atmosphere,  
we have to construct giant automated factories, 
on its surface powered by our lasers to suck in  
the atmosphere and compress it into a liquid. 
This gets pumped into bullet-shaped tanks,  
which a mass driver shoots all the way to 
the red planet, where they explode and mix  
with the oxygen. We’ve already been able to send 
individual missions to Saturn in just a few years.  
With enough resources, it should be possible 
to complete the task within 2 generations. 
Of course it would be much more 
convenient to have nitrogen left  
over from terraforming Venus on the side: we 
explained this in detail in another video.
So, about a century after the 
start of the terraforming process,  
we have a breathable atmosphere that has 
the right gases. If the liberated CO2  
isn't enough to warm it up to temperatures we 
can stand, we just add some super greenhouse  
gases. Mars at this point resembles a 
black marble from all the cooling lava,  
spotted with growing oceans and red patches 
where the old surface remains untouched. It’s  
still a wasteland, no better than a desert 
on Earth. We need to fill it with life.
Challenge 2: Biosphere
Installing a biosphere on a new planet is 
very difficult. Unexpected interactions  
between species or sudden diseases can 
destabilise it to the point of collapse.
We would probably begin by seeding our young 
oceans with phytoplankton. Without competition,  
it would bloom rapidly, filling up the oceans 
to become the bottom of an aquatic food chain.  
They can be followed by tiny zooplankton,  
then by fish. Maybe even sharks and whales. If 
things go well, life in the oceans will thrive.
Life on land is harder. Plants need 
nutrient-filled ground to sink their roots  
into. But most of the surface is the congealed 
remains of lava and ashes. We could wait for  
thousands of years for water and wind to grind it 
down into finer sands or try to do it manually.
But we want to be quick. And we have a 
big laser. Turning the beam on and off  
in rapid succession would cause the ground to 
quickly heat up and contract, which breaks it  
into smaller and smaller pieces. Add a bit 
of water, and you get a sort of dark mud.
Into this mud, we can mix fungi and 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria. They’re  
able to absorb nitrogen and convert it 
into nitrate compounds to feed plants.  
The first plants we want to bring are 
native to volcanic islands on Earth,  
since they are perfectly suited to 
the laser-blasted Martian landscape.
Eventually, the enriched mud becomes the 
foundation for grasslands and forests. In  
Mars’ lower gravity, trees can become very tall 
very fast. Their roots gather the nutrients  
they need and then dig deeper to turn more rocks 
into soil, forming a self-sustaining ecosystem.
At this point we can slowly introduce more plant 
varieties, insects and animals. Not mosquitoes  
though. The new biosphere needs to be maintained 
to prevent it from falling out of balance. If  
plants grow too quickly and absorb too much 
carbon dioxide, the planet cools down too much.  
If key species die out, we could see populations 
collapse faster than they could recover. On Earth,  
other species would move in to fill the void, 
but our Martian biosphere is not as flexible.
It takes hundreds if not thousands of years 
before Mars becomes a stable environment.
But eventually the planet will have the potential 
to sustain large human colonies. With air,  
water and food available, we 
can finally call Mars – black,  
blue and green – our home. A 
giant, volcanic island in space.
Will it last though?
Challenge 3: The long-term future
There is a problem we haven’t addressed: Mars’ 
core does not produce a magnetic field, so it does  
not have enough protection from solar radiation 
or cosmic rays. This becomes dangerous for the  
long term health of Martian populations. So as a 
final step, we need an artificial magnetic field.
It doesn’t have to be huge like Earth’s. It  
just needs to deflect the solar wind 
enough so that it doesn’t touch Mars.
The easiest way is to construct a magnetic 
umbrella far ahead of Mars that splashes the solar  
wind to the sides. A big, superconducting ring 
powered by nuclear facilities is all it takes.  
It would orbit at the Mars-Sun L1 
point, keeping it constantly in  
between the Sun and Mars and protect 
the new atmosphere. And that’s it!
Terraforming Mars would take some work, 
hefty resources and probably a century or  
ten but it would be the first time 
we’ve lived in a home designed and  
shaped solely by us and for us. A first 
step towards our future among the stars.
The first step we can already take 
down on Earth is learning more about  
the physics and biology needed for such a project.
To help you with that, we’ve created a series of 
lessons to build your fundamental understanding  
of these topics. Made in collaboration 
with our friends at Brilliant.org,  
these lessons give you a deeper understanding 
of the topics from our most popular videos,  
from supervolcanoes to black 
holes to climate science.
Brilliant is an interactive learning tool 
that makes math, science, and computer  
science accessible with a hands-on approach. 
Because we know that to really learn something,  
you’ve got to do it. Think of each lesson as a 
one-on-one tutoring version of a Kurzgesagt video.
In our latest lesson, you’ll learn more 
about how Mars lost its atmosphere and  
how we might protect a terraformed 
Mars from suffering the same fate.
Brilliant has thousands of lessons to explore—from 
math-based topics like algebra and probability  
to the concepts behind algorithms and machine 
learning. And with new lessons added each month,  
including ones from Kurzgesagt, you’ll 
always find something fascinating to learn.
To get hands-on with Kurzgesagt lessons and 
explore everything Brilliant has to offer,  
go to Brilliant.org/nutshell 
and sign up for free today.  
There’s even an extra perk for Kurzgesagt 
viewers: the first 200 people to use the link  
get 20% off their annual membership, which 
unlocks all of Brilliant’s courses in math,  
science, and computer science.
 
We love seeking new horizons with our  
research – Brilliant will be the catalyst 
to expand the limits of your knowledge.
everything changed when the slave Nation
attacked what used to be a thriving
colony is now a captured country
slaves do the work serving their new
Masters until they die only to be
replaced by new victims harvested in
brutal raids but let's go back to the
beginning
[Music]
the world war of the ants is claiming
millions of lives every day but in the
brutal world of ants straight up war is
not the only way around 50 ant species
practice slavery the most extreme
division of labor
we don't know how this began but some
ant species perfected this cruel trade
meet polyogus the most intense of the
slaver and tribes there are different
species but generally they're four to
ten millimeters long with round to
blackish bodies and sickle-shaped
mandibles polyergus have specialized in
slavery so much that they've lost their
ability to care for themselves
they don't clean build nests care for
their brood or feed themselves they only
exist for raiding
slaves make up 80 to 90 percent of the
ants in their colonies so a few hundred
polyergus and a single queen control
thousands of slave ants we'll summarize
and simplify what we know about
polyergus into one Grand Story you can
find more information in our sources so
now let's witness the cruel banality of
nature The Raid
it all begins on a mild Summer Morning
on a sunny field
witness this colony of over ten thousand
formica ants genetically cousins of
polyergus who build a thriving Nest
Underground
they are a widespread genas some species
are good Fighters some great Builders
and some cattle Farmers often welcomed
by humans because they hunt Vermin that
hurt forests nobody noticed the lone
polyager Scout that briefly showed up
this morning before she bolted away
again
the attack begins in the early afternoon
the Scout returned from her mission to
find the formica nests she dances
erratically and spreads pheromones that
excite and mass recruit more and more
ants until a large raiding party of a
thousand Warrior s's has formed a
close-packed well-organized column up to
10 meters long begins to move as the
polyacus raiding party arrives at the
formica Colony the attack begins almost
immediately
dozens of attackers begin digging and
clearing up debris from The Nest
entrance to make it easier to storm as
soon as they're done hundreds of the
attackers Rush inside
The Defenders vastly outnumber their
attackers and our formidable Warriors
able to shoot at it but instead of
fighting back effectively they seem
confused and Scatter rather than
fighting back
polyergus also seems to be somewhat
resistant to the acid sprays of the
Defenders and so even if a defense is
forming the attackers use their
mandibles to pierce and kill there are a
few different ideas as to why polygous
attacks are so efficient and one of the
most fascinating ones is chemical
warfare
instead of relying on Brute Force they
release a propaganda pheromone that
makes the Defenders Panic unable to
mount an organized defense
the attackers have nothing to gain from
intense ant-to-end combat other than
immense casualties what's more they
actually want their victims to survive
so that they can be rated again in a few
weeks as the raid unfolds the attackers
breach deep into the colony looking for
their most valuable possession the
coronis babies
they grabbed the pupae and larvae that
will make up the next generation of
formica and carry them out of the nest
hundreds are abducted and brought back
to the polyergus colony in this rate
alone well most of them a few unlucky
ones are eaten as a sort of snack the
surviving victims will be turned into
slaves
after about an hour The Raid is over and
the formica can begin to recover it
seems their only strategy is to make
even more ants a decent sized Colony can
forfeit thousands of pupae in a single
raiding season and still survive
although in this case while the raid was
going on something even more Sinister
happened
hold that thought though because how are
polyergus turning ants into slaves
how to brainwash and slaves ants
conquered almost the entire planet over
100 million years ago they owe their
success to being social animals that
perfected chemical communication
chemical signals and cues let ants know
what their colony needs and what each
individual should do and most
importantly in this case who is a friend
or Foe
slave making ants are much less social
than other ant species
some species miss a lot of the genes
other ants have to make communication
possible in a sense they are bad at
talking to each other so it may be that
as polyoga's ancestors started to abduct
other ants they lost the ability to
collaborate and work together
productively
soon after the stolen formica Offspring
have been brought to the slaver Colony
they are progressively covered in
polyergus pheromones
they are chemically imprinted similar to
a duckling who imprints on its mother
after birth
when the New Slaves hatch they behave as
though they are part of the polyogus
colony and begin to work for them
unconditionally keeping the nest clean
caring for the next generation of slaves
and Masters hunting for food and feeding
their enslavers mouth to mouth
this sort of brainwashing goes so far
that if they encounter free formica ants
in the world they will treat them as
animates in a sense they're not true
slaves as they serve willingly and show
no interest in Freedom it's more like
violent abduction and adoption which
doesn't make things that much better and
as the formica only live for a few
months a constant new supply of victims
is necessary to survive polyergus can
never stop enslaving
how to make new slave colonies
how are new polyogre's colonies created
after all polyerga's workers are so
useless that a queen can't start a new
Colony without slaves but how does she
make slaves without Warriors it turns
out there are two main strategies the
more dangerous one might unfold during a
raid like the one we witnessed before
a young polioga's Queen silently follows
the raiding party
using the chaos of the invasion she's
able to find her way to the formica
Queen and kill her taking over the
shaken Colony although such a victory
may be very short-lived polyagers do not
tolerate other slaver colonies within
their hunting ground they raid each
other fiercely too and can destroy the
competing colonies nearby so while this
tactic sometimes works it is pretty
dangerous another young Queen is going
for a different strategy
she's looking for a full Mica Colony
that is further from her birthplace
attacking a whole Colony on her own
she bolts through an entrance pushing
aside confused ants that try to stop her
releasing a powerful appeasement
pheromone that drives Defenders away
she has only a short time window to find
the formica Queen deep in the Hostile
Nest once she finds her Target both
Queens engage in a fight to the death
Queen is well equipped with her sharp
mandibles she bites and rips into her
victim for about half an hour before she
finally calms down between her bites she
licks the chemical surface of the Dead
formica Queen covering herself in her
pheromones
when she's done with this Macabre ritual
for Michael workers approach her subdued
by her intense smells they start
grooming and feeding her as though
pledging their allegiance to their new
ruler she still might not be done though
for Mike economies often have multiple
Queens who all need to be defeated which
is not guaranteed often attacking Queens
will be stopped by a Phalanx of workers
that rip her apart or are defeated in
royal battle
but if she does manage to kill all the
Queens The Colony has been taken over
and the enslaved brood will begin to
serve a new Queen the usurper
she now begins laying eggs that are
cared for by her New Slaves until New
polyoga's ants hatch that will soon
start new raids on neighboring colonies
no matter what we humans do quietly
below our feet the world war of the ants
is Raging with wild and horrible
strategies fought by billions of
individuals every single day polyergus
will continue to hunt for slaves as to
stop raiding would be their demise and
in the war of the ants there is no
giving up
we want to explore even more ant species
and videos to come but not just ants our
planet has so many more wonders to
Marvel at and learn about that is if we
manage to preserve their habitat and
turn the tide on climate change
something we're very passionate about at
kotskazat and have covered extensively
in past videos we've found a partner to
turn our dedication into action we'll
pay to offset one month of your carbon
emissions with the help of our friends
from Ren by visiting rendoco and
answering a few questions you can find
out your personal carbon footprint your
first step should be to reduce your
footprint but there are limits to that
Ren lets you offset the rest of your
carbon footprint with a monthly
subscription that supports projects that
plant trees protect rainforests and
remove carbon dioxide from the sky we
think it's one of the many puzzle pieces
that can make a real difference in the
climate crisis once you sign up to make
a monthly contribution you'll get
pictures and updates from the project
you support so you can directly see the
impact you're making
Rena is completely transparent about how
they spend the money and we especially
like their rainforest protection project
in the Amazon another amazing ecosystem
full of wonder we want coming
generations to learn about as well
wren's project trains indigenous
communities to use drones and satellite
imagery to detect deforestation helping
them protect their rainforest home sign
up through ren.co kotskazat to start
helping the planet as climate change is
close to our hearts we will personally
pay for the first month of subscription
for the first 200 people to sign up
right
[Music]
supernovae are the most powerful
explosions in the universe unleashing
enough energy to outshine galaxies we
have no real metaphor for their power if
the sun were to magically go supernova
it would feel like you were being hit by
the energy of a nuclear explosion every
second for weeks
while supernovae are the engines of
creation forging the elements that
enable life they also burn sterile whole
regions of galaxies so what would happen
if one hit Earth
foreign
there are roughly speaking two ways to
make a supernova either the core of a
massive star implodes or less common a
white dwarf gains Mass to the point
where it ignites explosive nuclear
fusion the outcome is the same a
supernova explosion
when we think of an explosion on Earth
we think of something that happens fast
and ends but a supernova is more like a
volcanic eruption followed by a tsunami
at first there's a colorful ball of hot
expanding gas creating a spectacular
Cloud that will shine for about a month
but then it doesn't stop
hot and dangerous gas rushes outwards at
speeds of 10 000 kilometers a second
through the near vacuum of space
sweeping up the sparse gas of the Galaxy
this wall of gas expands for tens of
thousands of years and will eventually
span up to dozens of light years until
it finally cools off and disperses its
substance back into the Galaxy
so what if this star tsunami hits us
well the damage depends on how far away
it is
stage one thousands of light years away
humans have witnessed dozens of
supernovae but all of them were
thousands of light years away they
appeared as new stars some outshining
the moon twinkling for a few weeks and
disappearing aside from looking very
pretty at this distance they don't do
much to us
stage 2 300 light years away things
begin to get a bit icky once a supernova
occurs around 300 light years away we
can expect one this close to us every
few million years a single star giving
the night sky an eerie glow like
Twilight and while this is far enough
away and dim enough to not do harm to us
they can affect the Earth at these
distances it's like being hit by the
last weak waves of the star tsunami not
strong enough to do real damage but
still noticeable
in fact we know that over the past 10
million years multiple supernovae have
struck Earth from these distances
because we can find radioactive isotopes
of iron deep in the rocks and sediments
at the bottom of the ocean
amazingly these supernovae around the
solar system have cleared a 1 000 light
year wide pocket of space that's called
the local bubble they blew away the
interstellar gas and dust creating a
lumpy wall of gas that's now a cradle
for Star formation
stage 3 150 light years away
once the Supernova happens much closer
than 300 light years we're approaching
the Zone where it does real damage
stars have extremely powerful magnetic
fields when they die the tsunami of dead
star actually retains a lot of this
magnetic energy woven through the shock
wave that expands outwards
in this highly magnetized Cloud we get
conditions like in a huge particle
accelerator that's accelerating charged
particles like protons nuclei and
electrons to immense speeds which means
we have an expanding Cloud that is
shooting deadly radiation in all
directions long after the bright light
from the initial explosion has faded
away
if a supernova happens too close by
waves of these cosmic rays will wash
over the solar system for thousands of
years
while we're mostly protected on Earth's
surface by the atmosphere and ozone
layer the influx of extra radiation will
still increase cancer and mutation rates
not enough to cause a mass extinction
but it will be noticeable
spaceflight would become impossible in
the solar system as astronauts wouldn't
survive the waves of radiation for long
we don't know exactly how bad this would
be but a supernova that is close enough
May trap our species on Earth for
Generations maybe thousands of years it
only gets worse from here
stage four closer than 100 light years
within 100 light years things get bad as
a supernova disrupts our climate in ways
that we don't fully understand yet
there are a few unpleasant things
happening all one after another first
the high energy photons arrive from the
explosion followed by many decades of
radiation from the radioactive tsunami
both of which seriously damaged the
ozone layer Earth's shield against
harmful radiation the ozone layer
absorbs ultraviolet radiation by
breaking apart ozone O3 into O2 and a
free oxygen atom which later reforms
back into another ozone molecule but the
Supernova radiation breaks up nitrogen
molecules that gobble up the free oxygen
breaking the cycle and depleting the
ozone layer quickly
without a radiation Shield everybody
living on the surface is exposed to very
high levels of UV radiation from our sun
cancer rates would Skyrocket and just
going outside during the day could be
life-threatening
the extra radiation would also kill a
lot if not most of the plankton in the
oceans that live near the surface and
are the bases for the marine food chains
leading to a mass extinction
were still Supernova radiation would
ionize gas in the atmosphere which means
that it would punch through molecules
and knock electrons off nuclei leaving
them charged these charged nuclei then
act as seeds for water vapor to gather
and form massive Global clouds in the
worst case they would reflect enough
sunlight to trigger an ice age
in fact it's thought that the Ice Age
two and a half million years ago was
caused by a supernova some scientists
even think that a supernova about 60
light years away might have been the
cause of the devonian mass extinction
350 million years ago but wait there's
more
the electrons punched free by the
radiation form enormous electric
Avalanches or in other words lightning
Earth is hit by some of the worst
thunderstorms in millions of years the
intense lightning causes global
wildfires that consume forests and crops
devastate cities disrupt our electrical
grids and Global Supply chains all while
a decimated ozone layer leaks deadly
radiation
one in the past the ecosystem may have
bounced back from a nearby Supernova
after a few thousand or million years
there's no guarantee modern civilization
can take a hit of this magnitude we
would face food shortages skyrocketing
prices and Wars as Nations struggle to
not be consumed by chaos
so a supernova this close would at the
very least do significant damage for
hundreds or thousands of years if not
and our modern civilization and with it
millions or even billions of lives
still Humanity would likely survive and
could recover
stage five closer than 25 light years
a supernova closer than 25 light years
means that we're in its kill radius
where a mass extinction is all but
guaranteed probably about half of the
ozone layer would be destroyed and
massive climactic disruption on a scale
we've never witnessed would ravage Earth
entire ecosystems would swiftly be wiped
out by radiation AS Global wildfires
enveloped the planet all the things
described before happen but way more
intensely and much faster a few people
might survive for years in bunkers if
they have food supplies but the world
they return to will be devastated and
hostile to life for hundreds of
thousands of years
human extinction is extremely likely
the final stage four light years
being any closer to a supernova is very
unlikely because space is big but the
effects would be extreme even from four
light years away the distance to Alpha
Centauri a supernova would be almost as
bright as the sun in the sky while
casting two Shadows could be fun for a
few hours within days the Earth's
surface gets as hot as a sauna baking
the surface for weeks until the
explosion Fades the surface of Earth
Burns Scout of life even the oceans
aren't safe the massive amount of
radiation that follows Burns away the
ozone layer killing everything that sees
sunlight
it would be the largest Extinction event
in history reducing life to a few
survivors in the deep sea and critters
in the Deep soil life basically has to
start over
conclusion how worried do you need to be
so should you worry no fortunately there
are only a handful of stars that may
explode within one thousand light years
of Earth and none are close enough to be
a serious threat even better these Stars
will probably not go supernova for many
millions of years
so you are safe but there's no guarantee
for the far future as stars orbit the
Galaxy our descendants may find
themselves dangerously close to a
supernova but by then a far more
advanced and wiser Humanity will
hopefully be able to just move out of
the way in any case you can sleep well
tonight under the beautiful night sky
and if you dream about understanding the
physics behind this video and others
we've created a series of lessons to
build your understanding of fundamental
science
made in collaboration with our friends
are brilliant these lessons dive deeper
into topics from our most popular videos
including things like cosmology biology
and even climate science
brilliant is an Interactive Learning
tool that makes science accessible with
a Hands-On approach because we know that
to really learn something you've got to
do it
think of each lesson as a one-on-one
tutoring version of akotskazard video in
our latest lesson you'll Journey further
into the conditions that can trigger a
supernova and how to determine the
impact of one on a planet like ours
brilliant has thousands of lessons to
explore from maths-based topics like
algebra and probability to the concepts
behind machine learning and Quantum
Computing and with new lessons added
each month including ones from kotskazat
you'll always find something fascinating
to learn to get Hands-On with
courtskazat lessons now go to
brilliant.org Nutshell and sign up for
free and with a free trial of brilliant
premium you can explore everything
brilliant has to offer there's even an
extra perk for kotzka's out viewers the
first 200 people to use the link get 20
off their annual membership which
unlocks all of brilliant's courses in
maths science and computer science we'd
love to go above and beyond with our
research brilliant will be the Catalyst
to expand the limits of your knowledge
there are still a few copies left of our
12023 human calendar get it now for a
whole year of joy
[Music]
here in the labs we test very important
ideas to see what happens when you blow
things up or play with black holes many
of you suggested that we look into an
idea that sounds reasonable shooting
nuclear waste into space it's one of
those Concepts that seems like an easy
fix for one of the main problems with
the nuclear energy but it turns out this
idea is not just bad but horribly bad
and it gets worse the longer you think
about it why is that
[Music]
what is nuclear waste
clear waste is a fuzzy term and comes in
categories which vary from country to
country but in general there are three
broad levels ninety percent is low level
nuclear waste tools gloves or trash used
at a nuclear facility that could be
weakly contaminated with some
short-lived radioactivity this stuff is
generally safe for normal disposal
seven percent is intermediate level
nuclear waste mostly materials that have
been in close proximity to a reactor
core long enough to become dangerously
Radioactive with proper handling it's
either safely buried or melted down and
mixed into glass or concrete and stored
deep underground so 97 of nuclear waste
is similar to toxic byproducts from
other Industries not great not terrible
we can handle it
the remaining three percent is where our
problems begin
high-level nuclear waste is very
concentrated spent fuel taken out of a
reactor core
formerly uranium it's now made of
various dangerous and often highly
radioactive elements as a bonus it's
also incredibly hot and not easy to
handle at all this is what we want to
shoot into space All In All Around 440
active nuclear reactors create about 11
000 tons of high-level nuclear waste
each year since 1954 we've accumulated
400 000 tons of dangerous radioactive
waste most countries are dealing with it
by not dealing with it and kicking the
can towards the future
great so let's launch it into space
according to scientists space is big and
nobody lives there so it seems perfect
for eating away this mess there are a
few tiny problems though problem one
stuff ain't cheap
even though space flight is getting more
affordable it's still extremely
expensive just to get something into low
earth orbit costs on average about four
thousand dollars per kilogram
putting that into perspective it costs
about one thousand six hundred dollars
to mine separate and fabricate one
kilogram of nuclear fuel so launching
waste into space has suddenly made
nuclear fuel for reactors way more
expensive and greatly increased the cost
of the electricity they produce to
launch one reactor's worth of nuclear
waste would cost at least 100 million
dollars per year
to deal with all the 440 operational
nuclear power plants high-level nuclear
waste would cost some 44 billion dollars
per year for space launch before
packaging transport and security costs
are added
okay let's pretend we don't care
currently we couldn't shoot all the
nuclear waste into space even if we
wanted to there's just aren't enough
Rockets
in 2021 we saw a record 135 launches
into space if we repurposed each of
those rockets and filled them all with
nuclear waste the total amount that
could be lifted into a low earth orbit
which is the closest orbit above the
atmosphere is nearly 800 tons
we'd need at least 14 times more Rockets
to handle just today's nuclear waste let
alone get rid of the hundreds of
thousands of tons in temporary storage
we would need to create entire new Space
Industries to keep up with the demand
for giant toxic Space trash trucks and
it gets worse
problem 2 space is hard
we only made the calculation for low
earth orbit where we send most of our
rockets and satellites
littering the space around Earth with
thousands of casts have spent nuclear
fuel would be a nightmare for space junk
management and satellite collision
avoidance
we're still at this altitude there's
still a little bit of atmosphere causing
a tiny bit of drag so we might have
nuclear waste raining down from space
within just a few years experts would
call this a huge problem clearly we have
to launch our waste further if we wanted
to send it to perhaps the moon we either
need way more Rockets or we need to
build much bigger ones
making it even more expensive a single
Saturn V the rocket used by the Apollo
program which cost around 1.5 billion
adjusted for inflation per launch could
get about 43.5 tons from the Earth to
the Moon
so we'd need about 260 Saturn V rocket
launches every year and of course using
the moon as target practice for nuclear
waste tipped Rockets kind of makes a
huge mess
so maybe don't aim for anything space is
empty do we really need a Target
shooting waste in any random direction
is you guessed it also a bad idea orbits
are Loops which means they have a
tendency to come back to where they
started put enough in the sky in random
directions and you'll get one back
eventually
so we'd want to launch our nuclear waste
deep into space which means we need even
bigger rockets that would be even more
expensive
not that we would be completely safe
then Earth might run into these
interplanetary caskets at some time in
the far future and experience a pretty
meteor shower made from radioactive dust
okay how about we shoot it into the sun
ironically the sun is pretty hard to hit
while the sun has very strong gravity
everything on Earth is moving with
respect to the Sun including the rockets
that we launch meaning a rocket would
have to cancel out all the orbital
motion it has around the Sun so it can
stop orbiting and fall in
because of this it's actually easier to
launch a rocket entirely out of the
solar system than it is to launch it
into the sun
but to do either of these things we need
even bigger Rockets probably the biggest
we've ever built
hmm nothing works the thing is it gets
even worse problem three rockets go
rocket engineering has taken huge steps
since the Apollo era we've made them
relatively safe we've mostly replaced
the toxic explosive cancer fuels of the
past decades with much sailor mixes of
liquid oxygen and hydrogen or kerosene
the newest designs even land themselves
so that they can be reused and yet out
of the 146 launches in 2021 there were
11 failures which means that a sizable
number of our Rockets carrying
high-level radioactive waste would be
exploding on the launch pad or in the
worst case disassembling at high
altitude or crashing from Hypersonic
speeds each failure would be at least
equivalent to a miniature Noble but
instead of being contained under a slab
of concrete spread throughout the
atmosphere radioactive particles could
make their way to far away places by
riding on the winds most would fall into
the ocean but some would land on the
inhabited parts of the world
they could cover farmlands and get
concentrated into our food or enter our
water supply which is well bad imagine
regular large-scale nuclear disasters
happening people wouldn't be happy
conclusion and opinion part
nuclear waste is scary but the fear of
it and horrible ideas like shooting it
into space reveals how bad we are at
understanding risk because the largest
amounts of radioactive elements like
uranium and radon are actually released
by coal burning millions of tons of coal
each year leaves Ash as a waste product
that includes about 36 000 tons of
radioactive materials
less radioactive than high-level nuclear
waste but there's also a lot more of it
and it's handled way less carefully
some of this ash is caught by filters
but most is simply pushed back into
leaky mines shoved into piles exposed to
the wind or poured into ponds that
regularly spilled into rivers and lakes
living within 1.6 kilometers of an ash
pile increases your cancer risk up to 2
000 times over the acceptable limit and
this is on top of other toxic chemicals
like heavy metals and of course their
massive CO2 emissions
and yet while nuclear energy is flawed
and its current form may only be a
transitory technology nuclear power
plants are a harder cell than coal
nuclear waste and the lack of
willingness to deal with it are a real
issue it's not insurmountable though
there are good methods to handle it like
burying it deep underground or
reprocessing some of it into new fuel
but however we ultimately deal with this
issue we hope one thing is clear
shooting nuclear waste into space is one
of the worst ideas ever
researching this crazy thing conducting
all of these important tests and of
course creating this video took us
around 2 000 hours which is insane for a
YouTube video
and we couldn't do it without you if you
like what you just saw you can continue
your science Journey with one of our
products they're true pieces of
quadskazards you can take home and touch
and they're the best way to support this
channel like our limited edition human
error calendar that will bring you a
whole year of Joy learn more about the
world with our carefully researched
infographic posters get our habit and
gratitude journals to improve your life
with science or update your wardrobe
with our new hoodie editions if your
room is in need of a literal glow up get
one of these posters we've also got
notebooks plushies mugs and more all
designed with love and produced with
Care by us at codswart and if you sign
up to our newsletter we'll keep you up
to date on everything happening in the
courts gazarked Universe thank you so so
much for your support
right
[Music]
the Earth is a gigantic ball of
semi-molton Rock with a heart of iron as
hot as the surface of the Sun Titanic
amounts of heat left over from its birth
and the radioactive decay of trillions
of tons of radioactive elements find No
Escape but up currents of rock spanning
thousands of kilometers carry this
energy to the surface
Earth's crust is the only thing in their
way it feels solid to us but it's only a
fragile barrier an apple skin around a
flaming behemoth
true apocalypses can break through and
unleash eruptions tens of times more
powerful than all of our nuclear weapons
combined subjecting the climate to
centuries worth of change in a single
year while drowning continents in toxic
Ash and gases
super volcanoes
how big can they get and will they put
an end to humanity
[Music]
volcanoes
there are many types of volcanoes from
towering mountains to lava domes but
they have two main sources the first is
that the boundaries between tectonic
plates the pieces of the crust that
cover the Earth like a giant jigsaw
puzzle there are seven major tectonic
plates and dozens of smaller ones
drifting against each other at up to 15
centimeters per year this sounds slow
but on geological time scales it is a
Titanic struggle over who gets to stay
on the surface the winning plate
crumples into a new mountain range while
the loser is shoved underneath into an
ocean of hot rock at 1 300 degrees
Celsius the asthenosphere
the temperature here is enough to melt
rock into a liquid but the insane
pressures of all that mass keep it a
superheated sonnet tectonic plates are
usually in contact with water for
thousands of years and absorb some of it
when they're submerged into the hot
underworld this water triggers chemical
Transformations that allow tiny portions
to melt into magma
liquid magma is less dense than Solid
Rock so it rises to the surface in
Furious bubbles that accumulate in
sponge-like reservoirs right under the
crust if enough magma accumulates it
becomes powerful enough to pierce
through the crust which we experience as
volcanoes
this happens under the winning plate
like a Revenge attack by the loser
before it's erased forever
the second main source of volcanoes are
thought to be mantle plumes these are
columns of abnormally hot rock that rise
all the way from the planet's core
mantle boundary to the surface much less
is known about them but in a way it's as
if the Earth's mantle has weather
patterns and mantle plumes are a little
like hot air rising to form storm clouds
storms hundreds of millions of years old
made of rocks circulating at a rate of a
few millimeters per month
they don't care about the motion of
tectonic plates so they can break the
crust to create volcanoes in the middle
of nowhere that stubbornly stay active
as the crust shifts around them
the volcanic boom meter
scientists love to put big booms on a
scale and came up with a logarithmic
scale that measures the volume ejected
during an eruption the volcanic
explosivity index or vei simply put it
starts really small and gets very big
very quickly
a vei 2 eruption would fill 400 full
Olympic swimming pools with lava we have
around 10 of these per year
at vei 3 we already see devastating
effects like the eruption of the semaru
volcano in 2021 that destroyed thousands
of homes in Indonesia
at vei 5 we see catastrophic amounts of
materials cubic kilometers of debris
equivalent to an entire Lake of molten
rock blasted into the air like the 2022
hunger Tonga hunger hapai eruption that
sent a Shockwave around the globe many
times and created ocean-wide tsunamis
at a vei of six an eruption can change
the world in 1883 the Indonesian island
volcano Krakatoa erupted nearly
continuously over the course of five
months one of those eruptions blew it
apart producing the loudest sound
recorded in history 10 trillion times
louder than a Rocket taking off heard
Halfway Around the World
30 meter high tsunamis Swept Away nearby
populations and so much gas and Ash were
released the global temperatures cooled
by nearly 0.5 degrees Celsius
red Dusty sunsets followed for many
years
at vei7 we get super colossal eruptions
Millennium defining events that human
civilization has only encountered a
handful of times
Mount Tambora was a 4 300 meter high
mountain until it exploded in 1815 and
released 400 times more energy than the
Tsar bomber
140 billion tons of Ash and dust were
shot halfway to space before smothering
the world's skies turning them a sickly
yellow
there was no summer the following year
crops died and over a hundred thousand
people perished
this is the Dreadful potential of
volcanic eruptions with famines across
the other side of the world and even
centuries-long cold periods being
attributed to them
okay but what's a super volcano
the term supervolcano is a media
invention and not a scientific term the
main issue with them is that not every
eruption from a super volcano is a super
eruption
what makes super volcanoes special is
that they've been waiting to erupt for
hundreds of thousands of years
pressure builds up in colossal magma
reservoirs several kilometers deep until
it becomes strong enough to lift the
rock Above It by several meters rocks
crack under the pressure until they
finally give way and billions of tons of
gas and Ash blast out at supersonic
speed an insane explosion of at least a
thousand cubic kilometers that impacts
every corner of the globe and yet that
is only a small portion of the magma
Reservoir
super eruptions are like a Boiling Pot
of water popping its lid off and
spitting a bit off the top afterwards
the ground collapses into the void Left
Behind forming a hole called a Caldera
under this Caldera precious dance
building again until the volcano gathers
enough energy for another Super eruption
but this could take hundreds of
thousands of years
it's estimated that one of the few
volcanoes capable of super eruptions on
Earth could cause a catastrophic
eruption every 17 000 years on average
that would make them far more frequent
than comparable asteroid impacts the
most recent super eruption is the orenui
eruption 26 500 years ago in New Zealand
with the force of dozens of billions of
tons of TNT a mount everest-sized pile
of explosives a huge portion of the
landscape was scooped out and thrown
into the atmosphere
it left behind a Caldera spanning 20
kilometers and it caused the entire
southern hemisphere to undergo a period
of abrupt Cooling though among super
eruptions it's a mere firework
the lake tuber eruption of 74 000 years
ago was a much more significant turning
point in history it released a
gargantuan 5 300 cubic kilometers of
material enough to blanket parts of
South Asia in 15 centimeters of Ash and
trigger a rapid 4 degrees Celsius drop
in global temperatures
it's possible that the volcanic winter
lasted 10 years followed by worldwide
droughts for centuries
earth's climate might have not recovered
for a thousand years
the largest volcanic events we know of
were not really huge explosions but
floods of millions of cubic kilometers
of lava the grand finale were the
Siberian traps around 250 million years
ago a continuous release of lava for two
million years
they raised the ocean temperatures to
over 40 degrees celsius which caused the
Permian Triassic Extinction killing over
90 percent of all species
Earth's surface needed 9 million years
to recover
sorts of eruptions don't change the
climate they are the climate
but thankfully we haven't seen anything
even remotely close to that scale in
many millions of years
so should you be scared of super
volcanoes
definitely not they've been used to
frighten many people and are overhyped
as an unavoidable apocalypse the most
famous One Yellowstone will erupt again
but they will be relatively smaller
options
natural disasters for sure but not
enough to devastate the U.S or come
close to ending Humanity
chance of a ve I8 eruption in the next
few hundred years is less than two
percent and more importantly it wouldn't
come as a sudden surprise
however less powerful but more frequent
eruptions can also do serious damage to
our civilizations and are in many ways a
much greater concern
so we must watch for slow changes in
magma reservoirs like ground swelling
and temperature increases to get an
early warning that can save the lives of
people living the closest to a volcano
and there's time to develop solutions
that can remove sulfur and Ash from the
stratosphere to eliminate the root cause
of the climate disruption we've seen
from previous eruptions
who knows maybe we'll even be able to
turn this force of Destruction into an
agent for Good by exploiting the
geothermal energy held in their giant
magma reservoirs
we've done this work for so many other
disasters and we are already doing
things we could only have dreamed about
decades ago like sending a probe to
perform our first asteroid redirection
test with determination Humanity ready
can solve anything
so while deep below us an angry hell is
churning and waiting for its moment you
can sleep well tonight
learning how we can get ahead of
catastrophes like climate change and
super volcanoes is interesting but can
also be challenging maybe you still feel
like you don't really understand how
most of the science behind it works and
on your own it seems too hard to dig
deeper to solve this we've collaborated
with our friends from brilliant to
create a series of lessons to build your
understanding of fundamental science by
exploring fascinating insights from our
most popular videos on topics like black
holes the size of life and climate
change brilliant is an Interactive
Learning tool that makes science
accessible with a Hands-On approach
because we know that to really learn
something you've got to do it think of
each lesson as a one-on-one Deep dive
version of a quartz gazard video in our
latest lessons you'll discover the
mechanisms that drive climate change and
use them to understand the impact of
supervolcanoes on our global climate
Beyond new koskazard lessons regularly
released brilliant has thousands of
lessons for members to explore from
maths-based topics like algebra and
probability to the concepts behind
machine learning and Quantum Computing
with new releases each month you'll
always find something fascinating to
learn to get Hands-On with cuts exact
lessons now go to brilliant.org Nutshell
and sign up for free and with a free
trial of brilliant premium you can
explore everything brilliant has to
offer there's even an extra perk for
courts because our viewers the first 200
people to use the link get 20 off their
annual membership which unlocks all of
brilliant's courses in maths science and
computer science we love going down a
rabbit hole with our research brilliant
will take you by the hand to come along
on the ride
foreign
[Music]
[Music]
The universe is pretty big and very strange.
Hundreds of billions of galaxies with sextillions
of stars and planets and in the middle of
it all there is earth, with you and us.
But as enormous as the universe seems looking
up, it seems to get even larger when you start
looking down.
You are towering over worlds within worlds,
within worlds – each in plain sight and
yet hidden from your experience.
Let’s go on a journey – we’ll start
in a park, about a thousand meters long, enough
for a 15 minute walk.
Every time we click this magic button, we’ll
become a thousand times smaller.
Please slip into this magic science suit,
so you don’t die and can still see.
Ready?
Let’s go.
click
The Miniature Realm
You are the size of a grain of sand just 2
mm high, standing on a blade of grass that
seems as tall as an eight storey building
to you.
A square meter of lawn is now a dense metropolitan
area, with 100,000 blades, or two Manhattans
worth of grass towers.
From your new tiny perspective, the park that
you could quickly stroll through before, is
now the size of France.
Crossing it would take at least a week.
Human sized humans loom over you, 4 times
taller than the Empire state building, their
steps falling from horizon to horizon.
A bee the size of a helicopter lands near
you, making the ground shake, as its hairy
carapace vibrates with each wingbeat.
You try to escape but are barely able to move
because the air is so… gooey.
Before you clicked the button air resistance
was barely noticeable – but as you’re
now a thousand times smaller, it is as if
the air has become a thousand times denser.
It feels like you are moving through honey.
Flying insects like bees use this to their
advantage.
Their wings are not made for gliding but like
paddles that row through the air.
Scaled up to human size, the bee would outrun
a Concorde Jet – except it couldn’t even
take off because it would be too heavy for
its wings.
click
The Microscopic Realm
You’ve entered the microscopic realm and
are now less than 2 micrometers tall, about
the size of an e coli bacteria.
From your new tiny perspective, the park you
started in is now a million kilometers wide
to you – if you walked non stop it would
take some 25 years to cross it.
It is hard to grasp just how huge the microscopic
world is to its tiny inhabitants.
The giant bee that was close a moment ago,
is now the size of Mt.
Everest, towering high into the sky – but
alive, humming and vibrating.
The air here feels almost solid to you, on
the human scale it would be as viscous as
lava, extremely hard to push through.
The blade of grass now expands so far you
can’t see its edges, stretching as wide
as Paris would to a regular sized human.
You see valleys that look like dried up riverbeds,
dead patches like deserts and giant craters
left behind by voracious aphids.
But if you look closely, this is not terrain.
These are rows of individual cells, each the
size of a house with hard exteriors like glass
shells.
Every few cells, there are huge openings called
stomata, like mouths, sucking in air and blowing
out oxygen.
Suddenly the gigantic bee begins to move – a
construct made of rigid pieces that slide
against each other, like a suit of armor.
It takes off to escape a drop of water the
size of an Asteroid, that fell from another
blade of grass and is now rushing at you at
breathtaking speeds.
You brace for impact but instead of feeling
a strong punch you just get sucked in.
You try to swim but the water feels thick
and sticky and holds onto your limbs like
glue.
Air molecules are free spirits while water
molecules act more like social creatures that
group together whenever possible.
They pull on each other and create a relatively
strong cohesive force that traps you.
You can’t help it but you are still moving,
tumbling in all directions, helplessly dragged
along by an invisible current.
Floating in this miniature lake are tens of
thousands of micro-organisms.
They take on many forms – viruses the size
of tennis balls float around you aimlessly,
others like the Euglena oxyuris cells which
pass you like freight trains.
But most look like oily jellyfish the size
of a car, sporting long tentacles that act
like super charged propellers.
Despite the water holding onto them like glue,
some move hundreds of body lengths per second,
equivalent to a person shovelling through
mud at over 600 km/h.
However bacteria weigh so little and water
is so viscous that they basically have no
inertia – there is no gliding on this scale.
The result is a weird jerky motion that’s
hard to keep track of.
Maybe we can learn more about this strange
motion if we go even deeper.
click
Molecule Realm
You’ve become the size of a molecule, just
under two nanometers wide.
At your new tiny scale, the droplet now seems
as big as the Moon to a regular human.
The blade of grass it rests on could reach
from the tip of Alaska to the end of Australia,
and the park is now almost the size of the
Solar System – but instead of mostly empty
space, it is filled with stuff.
Everywhere you look, there are innumerable
amounts of molecules and atoms.
The rigid walls of the grass cells beneath
you are clearly vibrating, rippling with waves
of energy.
The water droplet contains nearly a sextillion
water molecules that are all in motion.
Water is actually a storm of H2O molecules
smashing into each other hundreds of trillions
of times a second.
Each of them is moving at speeds of around
2300 km/h and bombard their surroundings mercilessly,
sending small objects hurtling in all directions.
This is the source of the invisible current
that you noticed when you were a thousand
times larger.
Scaling this speed up to the human scale is
impossible, as a human sized molecule would
be 2000 times faster than the speed of light.
All this furious motion comes from heat.
Heat is a bit abstract at our human scale,
where you touch something and get a vague
sense of whether it is hot or cold.
But down here, you really feel what ‘heat’
is: the motion of molecules, vibrating, twisting
and colliding as if they’re inside a furious
ballpit.
When these molecules lose heat, they move
more slowly and collide less often.
When they gain heat, they speed up and smash
together with renewed fervour.
Temperature is basically the measure of the
average speed of these fantastic dancers performing
all day.
Suddenly a molecule hits you especially hard
and you are catapulted out of the water droplet
into the air again.
And here you see something unexpected: The
stuff between the air molecules: Nothing.
Between the molecules that make up the air
there is a vacuum.
On average a molecule in the air travels for
about 60 nanometers, which is about the length
of a hockey rink if it were the size of a
human.
If we were to compress all the molecules and
atoms buzzing around in the room you are watching
this in, they would only fill about 0.1% of
its volume.
99.9% of the space around you is a vacuum,
you just don’t notice it.
Which also means that every time you take
a breath, you breathe in mostly nothing with
a few atoms.
Click
Subatomic Realm
At your size of under 2 picometers, scale
starts to lose its meaning.
A human would be nearly 2 billion kilometers
tall relative to you, so large they could
stretch their arms from the Sun to Saturn.
An atomic nucleus would be the size of a grain
of sand you could hold on the tip of your
finger.
That grain holds 99.97% of the atom’s mass.
The rest, a sphere of influence about as large
as the Eiffel tower from your perspective,
is filled with an electron cloud.
That’s basically all the places where electrons
might be at any given moment in time.
Electrons are shapeshifters that morph around
outside a nucleus, creating a new and vibrating
mess of different shapes with every new moment.
Unlike the graceful motion of planets, the
atomic nuclei are chaotic blurs.
They bulge, roll, quiver and breathe.
They hold back the same energy that powers
nuclear bombs and it doesn’t let them sit
still..
They twist and vibrate sextillions of times
a second.
It is time to end our journey and return to…
click
What are you doing?
click
Stop it!
click, click, click, click, click, click,
click….
The Smallest Place (?)
We have reached the bottom, the border between
reality and unreality.
The scale here is the Planck length, which
is the distance light travels in a Planck
Time.
Planck time is the time it takes light to
travel a Planck length.
Ah ok.
None of our models of the universe make sense
at scales smaller than this, so for now, this
is it.
Sad click :(
We think that down here, particles bubble
into existence and then spontaneously disappear,
creating a quantum foam of unimaginable energy.
Can we go even smaller?
We don’t know.
It is time to return.
If you look up, the universe is large and
strange.
So incredibly large and strange.
But if you look down, into the tiny and extremely
tiny, the universe seems even larger, and
even stranger.
In the end, the perfect place might be where
you are right now – not too big, not too
small.
These hidden worlds are all part of our 12,023
Human Era Calendar.
This time you can join us on a journey through
the microcosm.
With each turn of the page you will reveal
a new world you didn’t know existed right
beneath your feet.
You know the drill by now: as always it’s
a super high-quality calendar, very shiny
and – only available for a short time.
We also have a few special deals for you in
our shop.
The calendar is a true piece of kurzgesagt
you can take home with you.
And we say this every year but it’s true:
every calendar purchase directly supports
what we do here at kurzgesagt.
And that’s not just creating videos but
– sparking curiosity all around the world.
So because of you, we can spread knowledge
and ignite an appreciation for space, nature
and life in people everywhere.
Thank you so much for making this possible!
Have a wonderful 12,023!
See you down in January!
friends make life good they provide the
scaffolding that makes it not just
bearable but fun they give us a sense of
meaning and purpose and are a source of
security self-esteem and happiness
almost nothing predicts how happy you
will be as how connected you feel and a
lack of social connection is associated
with a number of diseases and a shorter
life
but maybe you have scrolled through your
phone unsure who to call to go to a
movie with to celebrate with or ask for
comfort you may realize that you don't
have enough friends and feel lonely and
it's not just you disconnectedness and
loneliness are widespread many people
want more close friends but don't know
how to get them surprisingly nowadays
loneliness is highest among young people
whose relationships were also hit
especially hard by the global pandemic
social distancing stopped teens and
young adults from mingling in classrooms
clubs or dorms millions of friendships
may be lifelong friendships that might
have blossomed will never exist with
profound long-term consequences for our
Collective happiness the good news is
that it's not too late and there are
lots of friends to be found we'll mix
scientific information with actionable
advice in this video but we can't
address every individual situation
people cultures and schedules are
different if you suffer from chronic
loneliness you can also watch the video
we made about it
okay as with all important things in
life making friends is infuriatingly
simple but not necessarily easy but it
works through a few pretty
straightforward mechanisms
the most important thing about making
friends
people make friends with other people
when they spend casual time together
this is how our ancestors formed their
relationships because humans lived in
small close-knit communities in which
options for making friends were limited
so we just formed good relationships
with the people who were around us this
is why it's so easy to form new
friendships in school and University
Society locks you and your peers in a
building for several years you share
similar activities but more importantly
similar schedules overlapping and
fluctuating Social Circles form
naturally giving you regular Face Time
and shared experiences with many
different people
time to find others with similar World
Views or senses of humor
proximity can be more important than
similar interests
one study found that in student
dormitories the distance between rooms
was the strongest friendship predictor
living closer together meant a higher
chance of becoming friends
another study showed that being
physically present in a class A Lot
without saying a word makes others more
sympathetic to you
so the most important principle of
making friends is to regularly spend
time with people in the real world this
alone can make it happen automatically
and trumps all other advice but don't
forget that making friends is not a
numbers game or a competition don't
compare yourself to others everyone has
a social calibrator that can change as
you go through life maybe you were more
introverted as a teen but yearn for
Connection in your twenties maybe you
were part of sprawling Social Circles
but prefer fewer friends in your 30s
there is no right or wrong only right
for you
why we don't have enough friends
the main reason for a lack of
friendships is the simple fact that most
people don't prioritize friendships
nearly enough they don't realize until
it's too late that retaining friendships
Demands a regular energy and attention
although they are so important for
happiness friends often take a back seat
to other life decisions work commuting
romance or kids take up so much time and
energy that it's so much easier to crash
on your couch and lose yourself in
mindless activities especially as an
adult going for a bike ride getting
dinner or visiting a hobby store takes
much more mental effort and commitment
than it did after school when time ran
slower and energy and curiosity were
abundant
but it's not just adults who are too
busy for friends the average American
Teenager spends more time on Tick Tock
every day than socializing at parties
events or on the phone with friends
combined
established friendships don't require
the same time investment as early
friendships to keep up but they do
require some commitment
as life distracts you it's easy to skip
out on checking in when a friend goes
through exciting or depressing times
and so many friendships fade for lack of
attention Often by accident which is
extra tragic because there is never only
one person losing a friend it's always
at least two
another thing that makes many people
vulnerable is the way friendship
networks are structured the Friendship
Paradox is the phenomenon that on
average most people have fewer friends
than their friends which makes sense
since you're more likely to be friends
with someone who has many friends than
with someone who has few rather than
being densely interconnected friend
networks are often built around central
hubs so if central people disappear from
your life this can deprive you of many
connections at once and it can lead to a
distorted self-perception that you are
less popular than others although you
are perfectly average
it can get worse quickly with big life
Events maybe you move for school work or
love and are left without social
networks or you had a breakup that left
you with a smaller part of the formerly
shared social pie the reasons why you
find yourself with less connection than
you want are as diverse as people but
the underlying cause is almost always
time there is no shortcut to make new
friends and retain friendships you have
to prioritize relationships spend time
with people in real life and make them
feel that you care so take a look at
yourself and rebalance what you spend
your life doing
how to make new friends
Studies have shown that new friendships
can develop quite quickly weeks after
you meet someone
but it takes a few months for a casual
friendship to become a close
relationship with the biggest impediment
being time invested and the quality of
your interactions to make friends it
helps if you intentionally look for
people you have things in common with
and who are open to new relationships
you want to make it easy for yourself so
examine what kind of person you are
generally speaking extroverts tend to
Crave sensory stimulation spicier Foods
loud music or the excitement of engaging
a crowd introverts often confused with
shy people tend to be more sensitive to
sensory stimulants and prefer quieter
surroundings fewer people and even less
spicy food
places attract different people not
everybody can easily make friends at a
bar or a football game not everybody
finds a stroll through a park or a
bookstore stimulating men especially
form friendships around shared
activities but in general it's a good
idea to go to places that feel
comfortable where there are people you
might like who do things you find
interesting look for local clubs or
opportunities to volunteer check out
what hobby stores are around and dust
off your Space Marines or see if there
are new DND groups in your city and ask
if you could join one check Meetup apps
for gaming nights or wine tasting join a
sports club or look for people who go
hiking or want to cook together another
obvious Avenue is your professional life
it helps if you work in a job that
attracts people like you so you might
consider this when you choose a career
deepening your relationship with
colleagues can lead to Great friendships
especially if you look for peers and
there is no power imbalance and of
course there are friends you've lost
touch with you may be able to revive
some of these relationships in some
cases all it needs is a call or an
invitation research shows that more
often than not the other person will
appreciate that you've reached out
there are likely way more opportunities
to spend time with others than you are
aware of and if there aren't you can
take the initiative and create them
invitations are signals to start
friendships so bring people together by
having a dinner party organizing a
football game after work or starting a
board game group
everybody appreciates people who
organize fun things and the simple Act
of reaching out can kick-start a
self-propelling upward spiral of
well-being fun and connectedness that
can seriously improve the life of
everyone around you in meaningful ways
if you meet someone you Vibe with it's
pretty scary to make the first move but
they may feel the same way equally
interested in a friendship but also
blocked by fear of rejection so it's
worth going for it worst case they're
not interested which will sting for a
few hours but the best case could be a
lifelong friendship a risk well worth
the reward once you've formed early
connections check in whether they have
important things happening in their life
of course it's important not to be
overbearing but the more time you invest
the more opportunity you have to engage
in meaningful banter or silly jokes the
fact that friendships take time also
means that you need to be patient and
kind with yourself especially if you're
out of practice things will not improve
overnight but slowly step by step if you
keep up
open up Care and Share many people don't
have an issue being around others but
struggle to turn acquaintances into
friends
so let's talk about two important
principles that make it more likely that
you'll connect caring and sharing in
general our favorite topic is ourselves
and the things we care about because we
are literally at the center of our own
universe so people tend to like people
who are genuinely interested in them so
if you want to make friends your goals
should be trying to learn what makes
them tick just as important as caring
about others is reciprocity and openness
to connect you need to share the
experiences that made you you now you
don't want to overwhelm the other person
and immediately spill out your deepest
Secrets but open up a little and reveal
personal things because this also
signals to others that it's okay to do
the same the best case is that you find
shared experiences maybe you both had a
hard time in school maybe you share a
passion for weird movies
learning about others and sharing
personal stories in a balanced way and
not overdoing it is not an exact science
noticing the line between opening up and
over sharing requires practice and
depends on the vibe of the conversation
one of the perplexities of life is that
to get something it can be helpful to
convince yourself that you want it less
than you do in general it's good to be
laid back have fun and enjoy yourself do
things for yourself without expectations
but also be open to social opportunities
and accept invitations if they show up
and that's basically it
give friendships more priority in your
life check in with friends and regularly
go to things to have fun
show genuine interest in others and give
them the opportunity to know you without
selling yourself too hard if you do this
you're on track
if this sounds a bit scary the good news
is that human brains are hardwired to
seek connection It's Perfectly Normal to
seek out new friends and there are many
people who would welcome more close
relationships there are friendships up
for grabs everywhere and there are
plenty of people who will be so happy to
have you in their life as a good friend
go get to know them
we want to be part of your friendship
Journey so we've created a few things
you can share with new and old friends
two Wormhole pins to connect you and
your BFF no matter where you are if you
want to share something with your entire
friend group get a little bird pin for
each of them they're all unique but fit
together like pieces of a puzzle or get
matching posters to let your friends
know you're thinking of them or just
browse all the sciency things we made
for you if you like videos like this
getting something from our shop is the
best way to support us thank you for
watching
Queen
[Music]
At its height, the Roman Empire was home to about 
30% of the world’s population, and in many ways  
it was the pinnacle of human advancement. Its 
citizens enjoyed the benefits of central heating,  
concrete, double glazing, 
banking, international trade,  
and upward social mobility.
Rome became the first city in  
history with one million inhabitants 
and was a center of technological,  
legal, and economic progress. An empire impossible 
to topple, stable and rich and powerful.
Until it wasn’t anymore. First slowly then 
suddenly, the most powerful civilization on earth  
collapsed. By civilization, we mean a complex 
society where labor is specialized and social  
classes emerge and which is ruled by institutions. 
Civilisations share a dominant mutual language and  
culture and domesticate plants and 
animals to feed and sustain large cities,  
where they often construct impressive monuments.
Civilization lets us become efficient on large 
scales, collect vast amounts of knowledge,  
and put human ingenuity and the natural resources 
of the world to work. Without civilization,  
most people would never have been born. Which 
makes it a bit concerning that collapse is  
the rule, not the exception. Virtually all 
civilizations end, on average after 340 years.
Collapse is rarely nice for individuals. 
Their shared cultural identity is shattered as  
institutions lose the power to organize people. 
Knowledge is lost, living standards fall, violence  
increases and often the population declines. 
The civilization either completely disappears,  
is absorbed by stronger neighbors 
or something new emerges,  
sometimes with more primitive 
technology than before.
If this is how it has been over 
the ages, what about us today?  
Just as Europeans forgot how to build 
indoor plumbing and make cement,  
will we lose our industrial technology, 
and with that our greatest achievements,  
from one dollar pizza to smartphones or 
laser eye surgery? Will all this go away too?
Today our cities stretch for thousands of 
square kilometers, we travel the skies,  
our communication is instant. Industrial 
agriculture with engineered high yield plants,  
efficient machinery and high potency fertilizer 
feeds billions of people. Modern medicine gives  
us the longest lifespan we’ve ever had, while 
Industrial technology gives us an unprecedented  
level of comfort and abundance – even though 
we haven’t yet learned to attain them without  
destroying our ecosphere. There are arguably 
still different civilizations around today that  
compete and coexist with each other, but together 
they also form a singular, global civilization.
But this modern, globalized civilization is even 
more vulnerable in some ways than past empires,  
because we are much more deeply interconnected.  
A collapse of the industrialized world literally 
means that the majority of people alive today  
would perish since without industrial agriculture 
we would no longer be able to feed them.
And there is an even greater 
risk: What if a collapse were so  
deeply destructive that we were 
unable to re-industrialize again?  
What if it ruined our chances of enjoying a 
flourishing future as a multiplanetary species?
A global civilizational collapse 
could be an existential catastrophe:  
something that ruins not just the 
lives of everyone alive today,  
but all the future generations that could have 
come into being. All the knowledge we might have  
discovered, the art we might have created, the 
joys we might have experienced, would be lost.
So, how likely is all of this?
Let’s start with some good news. While 
civilization collapses have happened regularly,  
none have ever derailed the course of 
global civilization. Rome collapsed,  
but the Aksumite Empire or the Teotihuacans 
and of course the Byzantine Empire, carried on.
What about sudden population crashes?
So far we have not seen a catastrophe 
that has killed much more than 10% of the  
global population. No pandemic, 
no natural disaster, no war.  
The last clear example of a rapid global 
population decrease was the Black Death,  
a pandemic of the bubonic plague in the fourteenth 
century that spread across the Middle East and  
Europe and killed a third of all Europeans 
and about 1/10th of the global population.
If any event was going to cause the 
collapse of civilization, that should have  
been it. But even the Black Death demonstrates 
humanity's resilience more than its fragility.  
While the old societies were 
massively disrupted in the short term,  
the intense loss of human lives and suffering 
did little to negatively impact European economic  
and technological development in the long run. 
Population size recovered within 2 centuries,  
and just 2 centuries later, the 
Industrial Revolution began. 
 
History is full of incredible recoveries from 
horrible tragedies. Take the atomic bombing of  
Hiroshima during World War 2. 140,000 people were 
killed and 90% of the city was at least partially  
incinerated or reduced to rubble. But against all 
odds, they made a remarkable recovery! Hiroshima’s  
population recovered within a decade, and today 
it is a thriving city of 1.2 million people.
None of this made these horrible events any 
less horrible for those who lived through them.  
But for us as a species, these 
signs of resilience are good news.
Why Recovery is Likely Even in the Worst Case
One thing that’s different from historic collapses 
is that humanity now has unprecedented destructive  
power: Today’s nuclear arsenals are so powerful 
that an all-out global war could cause a nuclear  
winter and billions of deaths. Our knowledge 
of our own biology and how to manipulate it  
is getting so advanced that it is becoming 
possible to engineer viruses as contagious  
as the coronavirus and as deadly 
as ebola. Increasingly the risk of  
global pandemics is much higher than in the past.
So we may cause a collapse ourselves and it might  
be much worse than the things nature has thrown 
at us, so far. But if, say 99% of the population  
died, would global civilization collapse 
forever? Could we recover from such a tragedy?
We have some reasons to be optimistic. 
Let’s start with food. There are 1 billion  
agricultural workers today so, even if the 
global population fell to just 80 million,  
it is virtually guaranteed that many 
survivors would know how to produce food.  
And we don’t need to start at square one because 
we could still use modern high-yield crops.  
Maize is 10 times bigger than its wild ancestor; 
ancient tomatoes were the size of today’s peas.
After agriculture, the next step towards recovery  
would be rebuilding industrial capacity, 
like power grids and automated manufacturing.  
A huge problem is that our economies of scale make 
it impossible to just pick up where we left off.  
Many of our high tech industries are 
only functional because of huge demand  
and intensely interconnected supply 
chains across different continents.  
Even if our infrastructure were left unharmed, we 
would make huge steps backwards technologically.
But then again, we are thinking in larger time 
frames. Industrialization originally happened  
12,000 years after the agricultural revolution. So 
if we need to start over after a massive collapse,  
it shouldn’t be that hard to re-industrialize, 
at least on evolutionary timescales.
There’s a hitch, though. The Industrial 
Revolution was fuelled, literally, by burning  
easily-accessible coal and we are still very 
much reliant on it. If we use it all up today,  
aside from making rapid climate change 
much worse, we could hinder our ability  
to recover from a huge crisis. So we 
should stop using easy-to-access coal,  
so it can serve as a civilization 
insurance in case something bad happens.
Another thing that makes recovery likely is that 
we’d probably have most of the information we  
need to rebuild civilization. We would certainly 
lose a lot of crucial institutional knowledge,  
especially on hard drives that nobody could 
read or operate anymore. But a lot of the  
technological, scientific, and cultural knowledge 
stored in the world's 2.6 million libraries,  
would survive the catastrophe. The post-collapse 
survivors would know what used to be possible,  
and they could reverse engineer some 
of the tools and machines they’d find.
In conclusion, despite the bleak 
prospect of catastrophic threats,  
natural or created by ourselves, 
there is reason for optimism:  
humankind is remarkably resilient, and even in 
the case of a global civilizational collapse,  
it seems likely that we would be able to recover 
– Even if many people were to perish or suffer  
immense hardship. Even if we lost cultural 
and technological achievements in the process.
But given the stakes, the risks are still 
unnervingly high. Nuclear war and dangerous  
pandemics threaten the amazing global civilization 
we have built. Humanity is like a teenager,  
speeding around blind corners, drunk, without 
a seat belt. The good news is that it is still  
early enough to prepare for and to mitigate 
these risks. We just need to actually do it.
We made this video together with Will MacAskill,  
a Professor of Philosophy at Oxford and one of 
the founders of the effective altruism movement,  
which is about doing the most good 
you can with your time and money.
Will just published a new book 
called What We Owe The Future,  
which is about how YOU can positively 
impact the long-term future of our  
world. If you like Kurzgesagt videos, 
the chances are high you will like it!
The book has some pretty 
counter intuitive arguments,  
like that risks from new technology, such 
as AI and synthetic biology, are at least as  
grave as those from climate change. Or that 
the world doesn’t contain too many people,  
but too few. And especially that everyday 
actions like recycling or refusing to fly  
just aren’t that big a deal compared to 
where you donate, or what career you pursue.
Most importantly, it argues 
that, by acting wisely,  
YOU can help make tomorrow better 
than today. And how WE together  
can build a flourishing world for the thousands or 
millions of generations that will come after us.  
Many things we at Kurzgesagt talk about regularly 
are discussed here, in much greater detail.
Check out What We Owe The Future wherever 
you get your books or audiobooks.
Did we manage to unlock a new fear for you?
Let’s counter existential dread 
with appreciation for humanity.
Look how far we’ve come as 
a species. What we’ve built  
and where we’ve gathered. Let this new World 
Map Poster be a reminder of what we can achieve.
In the 1970s thousands of Chickenheads rained 
from the sky in Europe, making foxes and other  
wildlife confused and very happy. Why? They were 
filled with a vaccine to fight the deadliest  
virus known to humanity – since the 1930s 
a rabies epidemic had been sweeping across  
wildlife populations in Europe and humans wanted 
to finally get rid of the virus once and for all.
Rabies is named after Lyssa, the 
ancient Greek spirit of mad rage,  
and has been haunting us for at least 4000 
years. It can turn animals into angry beasts  
and humans into zombies that fear water. But 
what makes Lyssa fascinating is not just how  
bizarre and deadly its infection is, but also how 
incredibly good it is at avoiding our defenses.
Viruses exist on the edge between life and death, 
hardly more than a few genetic instructions that  
need living cells to multiply. The lyssavirus is 
simple even for a virus: It has only five genes,  
that is the instructions for five proteins that 
let it solve complex problems: Infect a mammal,  
avoid its immune system, travel to its brain, 
make more of itself and infect new hosts.
Let's see what happens if you get infected.
It all starts with a bite, most likely by a 
dog carrying millions of viruses in its saliva,  
pushing them deep into the tissue. The goal is 
your nerve cells, your neurons. They are living  
electrochemical wires, transferring signals 
throughout your body, and can stretch for up  
to 1.5 meters, with their cellular machinery 
on one end and a terminal on the other.
The terminal is where cells talk to each other, 
by passing chemicals that convey information.  
Lyssa probably binds to the receptors 
that are crucial for this process  
and slips inside the unsuspecting nerve cells.
Inside, the virus has to solve a big problem. 
It needs to get to the cellular machinery to  
take over the cell and make more viruses 
– and because neurons are pretty long,  
this can be far away. There 
is a solution at hand though:
Cells have microtubules spanning their 
insides that give them structural integrity.  
But they also provide a track system 
for a specialized delivery system:  
Dynein motors are actual motors that use energy 
and deliver packages. They are made from 50  
different proteins, ten times more than the virus, 
and look like a little pair of shoes. Lyssa uses  
one of its five proteins to hijack this amazing 
system and order it to head for the nucleus.
What is the immune system doing to prevent 
all of that? Well, unfortunately not much.
Usually when a virus attacks your civilian cells 
are crucial in activating your immune response.  
They notice that they have been infected and 
release hundreds of thousands of a special family  
of proteins: The interferons that, well, interfere 
with viruses. We’ll have to simplify a lot,  
but in a nutshell, Interferons alert your 
immune system to make antivirus weapons.  
But they do much more: they tell civilian 
cells to turn down their protein factories  
for a while – which means that viruses 
can’t replicate efficiently anymore.
And interferons tell your cells to become super 
transparent, which is important, because how  
can your immune cells notice that your civilian 
cells are infected when viruses hide inside them?
Your body solves this by creating display windows 
into their insides, called MHC class I molecules.  
Cells constantly produce stuff to stay alive,  
and to showcase to your immune cells what is 
going on inside them, they take random samples  
of their products and put them into these 
tiny display windows to give a peek inside.
Interferon tells your cells to make WAY more 
display windows and become super transparent.  
If a cell is infected and forced to make virus 
parts, your immune cells will see these parts  
in a window and order the infected cell to 
kill itself – and all the viruses trapped  
within. This is one of the most powerful 
methods of wiping out a viral infection.
Unfortunately Lyssa blocks your neurons 
from making interferons and stays basically  
invisible to your immune system. In contrast 
to many other viruses, when it replicates,  
it doesn’t kill its host, which 
would also trigger alarm systems.  
Instead it stealthily jumps from neuron to 
neuron, very slowly making its way to your brain.
This phase can take weeks to 
months and very rarely even years  
and depends on a bunch of things, like if the bite 
was in your face or foot or how many viruses got  
into your muscles. Lyssa is a patient monster. 
Until it reaches its goal: Your brainstem.
Finally, the immune system catches 
on that something isn’t right  
and reacts. It dispatches some of your most 
powerful antivirus cells, Killer T Cells,  
to seek and kill infected cells and wipe out the 
enemy. In other viral infections this would be a  
turning point, but in rabies the T cells are 
rushing towards their doom. Simple Lyssa with  
its 5 proteins plays a uno reverse card, using 
the immune system’s ingenuity against itself.
Your central nervous system is a very fragile 
part of your body and so the immune system has  
to be very careful. A few haywire immune 
cells in your brain is a quick way to die.  
So they aren’t free to enter your nervous 
system, they have to be be invited in  
and can be kicked out. To protect themselves, your 
nerve cells can order T Cells to self-destruct,  
if they think they are overreacting. And Lyssa 
figured out a way to make infected neurons express  
this order. So as your powerful defense cells 
arrive – they are ordered to commit suicide. 
 
Now the virus infiltrates the brain stem. Once 
this stage is reached you are going to die.
How Lyssa Kills
One of the most irritating things about 
the Lyssavirus is that we still don’t  
know exactly how and why an infected person dies.
Our usual idea of viruses causing 
damage is by multiplying rapidly,  
killing their host cells once they have made 
enough copies, triggering a massive immune  
reaction that also does a lot of damage. But 
this doesn’t seem to be what happens here.  
Brain tissue of rabies patients shows 
minimal, sometimes non-existent damage. 
Instead of murdering everything in sight, it 
is currently thought that lyssa wreaks havoc  
by messing up the neuron communication inside your 
brain, so much so, that it can’t function anymore.
It attacks the brain and leads to symptoms 
like confusion, aggression and paralysis. 
Now the virus begins to leave. Still traveling 
through neurons, it migrates away from the brain  
and heads for the salivary glands. This is 
remarkable, because after traveling in one  
direction the virus reverses its course. After 
decades of study we don’t know how this works.  
Lyssa ends up saturating your saliva 
ready for the irate mammal to bite another  
and repeat the cycle. While this seems 
like the beginning of a Zombie outbreak,  
luckily there are no known cases of a human 
biting another and spreading rabies this way.
Now the end is near. You are rapidly developing 
encephalitis, a swelling of the brain with many  
unpleasant neurological symptoms, from lethargy 
to paralysis. Slowly at first, and then suddenly,  
organ after organ fails as you slip into a coma. 
There is no known effective therapy, barely anyone  
has ever survived Lyssa once symptoms begin to 
show. It is by far the deadliest virus we know.
Except, there is actually something 
that could save you – a vaccine.  
Rabies was one of the first diseases 
humans developed a vaccine for.  
As vaccines do, it prepares your immune system for 
a future attack, so it has the right weapons ready  
in high numbers. The horrific tricks of simple 
Lyssa don’t work once you are vaccinated. And the  
vaccine is special for another reason – because 
Lyssa is so slow in the first few weeks, it can  
be given to you after you have been exposed. So 
you can still be vaccinated after you have been  
bitten by an animal. Which is super important 
if you’ve had contact with a sick wild animal,  
say a bat, because you often don’t 
even notice a bite from tiny teeth.
Rabies is a monster. One that has followed 
our species around for thousands of years,  
that our ancestors were terrified of and rightly 
so. It still kills around 60,000 people each year,  
almost half of them children. We are far from 
eradicating this monster – It lurks in the  
shadows, in forests and animals of all kinds, 
ready to return in greater numbers if we ever  
forget how to keep it at bay, or if we continue 
the trend of being suspicious of vaccines.
Let us hope that one day 
humanity slays this monster,  
so it can become like most 
monsters: Part of our imagination.
There are much deeper levels 
of knowledge to explore about  
rabies than the glimpse we just showed you.
But digging into sources and 
scientific information on your own  
can be intimidating. So we partnered with our 
friends from Brilliant to create an interactive  
course with hands-on lessons to guide you through 
some of the concepts we showed in this video.  
Brilliant is an interactive learning 
tool with over 60 courses in math,  
science, and computer science. They make 
science accessible with a hands-on approach.  
Think of it as a one-on-one tutoring version 
of a Kursgesagt video. You’ll experiment with  
how fast the virus can reach your brain based on 
its protein makeup or run simulations on Rabies’  
genetic evolution, to explore how mutations 
created the deadly virus we know today.
You can do things like manipulate energy 
to see how black holes are formed,  
or control the expansion of space itself to 
determine the ultimate fate of the universe.
To get some behind-the-scenes-science-coaching 
on space and biology and many more topics,  
go to Brilliant.org SlashNutshell and sign 
up for free. And there’s an extra perk for  
kurzgesagt viewers: the first 200 people to use 
the link get 20% off their annual membership,  
which unlocks all of Brilliant’s courses 
in math, science, and computer science.
We love to go down a rabbit hole 
with our research – Brilliant will  
take you by the hand to come along on the ride.
The future of humanity seems insecure. 
Rapid climate change, political division,  
our greed and failings make it hard to look at 
our species with a lot of optimism and so many  
people think our end is in sight. But humans have 
always thought they lived in the end times. Every  
generation assumes they’re important enough to 
witness the apocalypse and then life just goes on.
This is a problem because it 
leads to short term thinking  
and prevents us from creating the best world 
for ourselves and our descendents. What makes  
this worse is that we may actually BE living at 
an extremely critical moment in human history.  
To understand why, let us look at the 
temporal window of humanity and ask:
When will the last human be born and 
how many people will there ever be?
These sorts of estimates come with a 
lot of uncertainties, so please take  
them with a gigantic grain of salt. To get 
a sense of how many people there will be,  
let us see how many have already lived. Modern 
humans arose some 200 thousand years ago.  
They were uniquely good at 
making tools, telling stories,  
thinking abstractly, planning and working together 
in large groups beyond their close family.
Still there were not that many of us. Surpluses 
in food were sparse, survival was hard,  
life expectancy was low. It took us 150,000 
years to grow to a population of 2 million.  
Improvements were gradual and eventually 
led to the agricultural revolution,  
arguably the biggest change in our history. 
This was when our numbers really started  
growing. It took ten thousand more years to get 
to 300 million. But that increase was dwarfed  
by the industrial revolution. In 1800 there 
were a billion of us. The human population  
doubled in just 120 years and then again in 
fifty. Today, we number around 8 billion.
In total, over the last two hundred thousand years 
about 117 billion humans were born and lived,  
and 109 billion also died. Which means that 
about 7% of all humans that ever lived are alive  
right now. As many as were born in the first 
150,000 years of human history. Every minute,  
270 babies join the party. But there are not just 
more people, never before have we been as healthy  
and well off, or lived longer. With growing 
living standards our birth rates collapsed.  
The UN estimates that around the year 2100 
we will hit our population peak and there  
will be 125 million people born each year. 
It is pretty unlikely that birth rates will  
stay stable forever, but let’s pretend 
to make our thought experiment simpler.
How many people there will be in the future 
depends on when our species will die out.  
And here we find a lot of uncertainties. 
We are able to destroy ourselves through  
our own inventions – but we are also able to 
find solutions to avert catastrophic risk.
We can change the direction of planet killer 
asteroids but we’ve also invented nuclear weapons.  
We discovered antibiotics but also carry diseases 
across the globe in a matter of days. Our  
industrial system gave us an incredible standard 
of living but also changed the atmosphere in the  
process. It is very hard to say if human ingenuity 
will prolong or shorten our species’ lifespan.
If things go badly our end could come 
suddenly. But if we manage to avoid that,  
we could conceivably stick around for a long 
time. So every day we don’t destroy ourselves  
may mean life for an unfathomable number of 
humans. How many people are we talking about?  
It depends on how far our 
species is going to expand.
Scenario 1: Humans will never leave Earth
If we stay on our home planet, a good metric 
to look at is the extinction rate of animals  
that we get from the fossil record. The 
average lifespan of mammalian species is  
in the region of 1 million years, with 
some surviving up to 10 million years.  
Our close relative homo erectus 
survived for about 1.9 million years.
Let us be conservative and assume that humans 
will survive for a million years, which leaves  
us 800,000 more years to dawdle away. Assuming a 
stable birth rate of 125 million people each year,  
this means there are roughly 100 
TRILLION humans waiting to be born.  
850 times greater than the number 
of people that have ever lived.  
This would make everybody alive today only 
0.008% of all people that will ever live.
Think about where this leaves you. Instead 
of putting you at the end of the chaotic  
mess that was our past, it would mean you 
live at the very beginning of something big.  
The start of the human story rather than the 
end. Doesn’t this feel incredibly different?
And now consider that this may be 
an extremely pessimistic estimate.  
If we match the survival time of the most 
successful mammals, then our future numbers  
rise to 1.2 quadrillion people that have yet to be 
born. And even this seems far from our potential:  
As the sun slowly gets hotter and brighter, earth 
will remain habitable for about 500 million years,  
giving so many more potential people 
the chance to become actual people.
And now let’s begin to think big.
Scenario 2: Humans will leave Earth
We went from humans worshipping 
the moon, to humans walking on it,  
so who knows how much farther we can go? If we 
don't die out within the next few hundred years,  
ideas that seem outlandish right 
now become serious considerations.
If we believe that we have a chance of 
surviving for maybe millions of years,  
then we could expand onto the other planets 
or into our own artificial worlds. Life needs  
three things: a surface, resources and energy.  
Our Sun provides energy for billions of years and 
there is so much water and material floating in  
the asteroid and kuiper belt that we could 
sustain many times our current population.
Instead of living on planets, we could decide to 
construct our own artificial worlds and habitats.  
With resources and energy so abundant, we could 
try out different types of society and ways of  
life. An interconnected civilization spanning the 
solar system would create the basis of existence  
for an absurd number of individuals, orders of 
magnitude more than if we stick to earth, even  
if it only existed for a few million years. This 
future doesn’t have to be grim and dark as science  
fiction likes to paint it. With quadrillions of 
people waiting to be born, we will have billions  
of doctors working on curing cancer, billions 
of problem solvers working on ending poverty and  
billions of video game developers making life 
fun. More humans may actually mean more progress.
Another upside of leaving earth and spreading 
out is that it becomes much harder for us to  
become extinct, as you need a solar system 
wide catastrophe to catch everybody.  
So aside from nearby supernovae 
or Gamma Rays bursts,  
humanity would be relatively safe from 
extinction, maybe for billions of years.
If we manage to survive for that long, slow 
evolution or genetic engineering might split us  
into multiple species, or we might intentionally 
keep ourselves the same as we are now.  
So to account for that, we’ll just talk 
about people from now on, instead of humans.
Ok. Now let us think really big.
Szenario 3: People leave the Solar System
As enormous as the solar system is, it is just 
one star system among billions in the milky way.  
If future people can colonize, say, 100 billion 
stars and live there for 10 billion years, while  
each generating 100 million births per year, then 
we can expect something like a hundred Octillion  
lives to be lived in the future. This is a 1 with 
29 zeros, a hundred thousand trillion, trillion.
We can spin this up as much as we like. The 
Andromeda Galaxy will merge with the Milky way,  
adding another trillion stars for us to settle. 
Red Dwarfs stay active for up to a trillion  
years and future civilizations might even find 
energy for their habitats around black holes.  
A sufficiently advanced civilization of our 
descendants might even try to reach other  
galaxy groups. While these numbers are mind 
blowing, they may underestimate the number of  
unborn people by many orders of magnitude. If we 
divide the total energy available in a galaxy by  
the average energy needs of a single person, 
then we get a tredecillion potential lives.  
A million, trillion, trillion, 
trillion potential people.
Conclusion
Hopefully what has become evident is that 
if we don’t kill ourselves in the next  
few centuries or millennia, almost all humans 
that will ever exist, will live in the future.  
Which brings us back to us, in the present. 
We exist at a highpoint of human history,  
with incredible possibilities at our grasp. 
Technological, environmental and societal.  
What we do matters for all the 
people who do not exist yet.
So while it is not en vogue to think 
about humanity's long term future with  
optimism – or to think about it at all –, 
maybe this has given you a bit of perspective.  
If we screw up the present, so many 
people may never come to exist.  
Quadrillions of unborn humans are at our mercy.
Even if we go with fairly conservative estimates,  
the unborn are by far the largest group of people 
– and the most disenfranchised. Somebody who might  
be born in a thousand or even a million years 
deeply depends on us today for their existence.
This is why it is important to think about the 
distant future and why our presence is so crucial,  
why it matters what we do today. One day the 
last human will be born. We don’t know when.  
But if we change our perspective from 
us living at the end of the human story,  
to us living at the very beginning we can 
not only build a wonderful world for us  
and for them but also for 
countless numbers of others.
HUGE announcement: we are launching Kurzgesagt in 
six more languages! Arabic, Brazilian Portuguese,  
French, Hindi, Japanese and Korean, on top of our 
English, German and Spanish channels. To bring  
new perspectives and a love for science to as 
many people as possible – especially to some  
languages that are underserved because 
it is not profitable to translate to.  
If enough people watch our new channels, we 
hopefully can run them for many years to come!
This is where we need YOUR help. It takes us a 
lot of time, effort and yes, money to translate  
our videos properly and run so many channels 
– so to make this sustainable, please help  
us spread the word!If you are a native in one of 
these languages, share our videos on social media  
and tell your friends and family – make people 
in your native language aware that it exists.
This multi language expansion is 
supported by Open Philanthropy,  
an organization that tries to do as much good as 
possible. They want to help us spread awareness  
of science, and ideas for how YOU can help 
humanity thrive. Their values align with  
ours in many fundamental ways so we are going to 
work with them on more projects in the future.
So please help us spread the word 
– and thank you for watching.
If you are like most people, there is a gap 
between the person you are and the person you  
wish to be. There are little things you think you 
should do and big things you ought to achieve.
From working out regularly, eating healthily, 
learning a language, working on your novel,  
reading more or simply actually doing 
your hobby instead of browsing reddit.
But it sometimes seems that to achieve 
your goals, you have to become a different  
person. Someone who is consistent, puts in 
more effort, has discipline and willpower.  
Maybe you have tried your hardest to be like 
that. And it worked! For a while. Until you  
find yourself slipping back into your old 
ways. In the end, you always seem to fail.  
And with every failed attempt, you become more 
and more frustrated and annoyed with yourself.
If you believe “success and hustle” 
internet, it is all your own fault:  
if you don't succeed, you just didn’t want it 
enough and the failure is all you. But change  
is actually hard. And as with most things in 
life, understanding why makes things easier.
The Jungle
Imagine your brain as a lush and 
dense jungle. Moving through it,  
say to make a decision to do something, 
is like moving through an *actual* jungle:  
It is hard and it costs energy. 
Your brain hates expending energy,  
so it came up with a trick: All your actions and 
behaviors leave paths in the jungle of your brain.
As you start doing something, you trample down 
some plants and make rough, improvised trails  
through the undergrowth. The more often you do 
the thing, the more pronounced the trail becomes.  
Over time it turns into a path that is 
easier to tread, so you take it more often  
and it turns into a street. As you repeat 
doing the thing, over and over for years,  
the street turns into a highway. Traversing it 
becomes effortless, familiar and comfortable.
The more pronounced your brain highways, 
the more you get used to their comfort.  
So we continue to use them, which means 
we tend to do what we have always done.  
This is why change is hard, especially as an adult  
when your jungle is criss-crossed by 
lots of established streets and highways.
To understand how those highways are built 
we need to distinguish between two things:  
Routines and habits.
The Things You Do: Routines and Habits
A routine is a sequence of actions that you carry 
out the same way every time because they’ve worked  
out well for you. For example, you get the 
same ingredients for your favorite dish and  
cook them in a certain order, because you like 
the taste of the result. Or before going to bed  
you set an alarm at 6:30 because 
this is when you want to get up.
Imagine routines executed by a wise planner. It is 
slow and analytical, responsible for strategizing  
and mental calculations. The planner is 
aware of the future and carefully considers  
what kind of result you want. Based on that, it 
chooses actions to achieve specific outcomes,  
even if they are uncomfortable, like 
taking a shower after getting up.
Routines can eventually turn into 
habits, which feel much easier  
because they are basically a sequence of 
actions carried out without thinking about them.  
You have done them so often before that 
your brain considers them rewarding  
and a great response to a situation. So a 
habit can feel like you’re on autopilot.  
You don’t have to convince yourself to do 
something that’s a habit - you just do it.
The important thing about habits is 
that they are set in motion by triggers,  
context cues that can be single 
things or entire situations,  
that give your brain the signal 
to start the behavior or action.
You already have a lot of triggers in 
your life: like when you see your phone,  
you almost always unlock the screen. Or you reach 
for the seat belt when you sit in a car. Or when  
you buy your coffee before work, you also get a 
cookie, even though you aren’t actually hungry.
Habits are executed by an impulsive toddler. 
It responds to your immediate desires, based  
on what is around you. Without considering 
any longer-term goals. For the toddler,  
the future doesn’t exist and it hates hard work. 
So when it notices a trigger, it steers you to  
take this easy road inside your brain that leads 
to a familiar rewarding result. If you get coffee,  
the toddler also wants the cookie, just 
because that’s what you do every morning.
​This rewarding feeling is also how most of 
your bad habits started: chocolate is tasty,  
browsing reddit is occasionally 
mildly entertaining.  
This is why you repeat these actions, 
even if they are bad for you.  
Rewarding feelings associated with an action 
demand to be repeated and so a bad habit is born.
While the toddler sounds like 
a built-in sabotage mechanism,  
it is as important as the wise planner and 
actually they work together most of the time!
You need your wise planner for thinking big 
thoughts and parallel parking and doing your  
taxes. But letting your wise planner do everything 
would cost too much energy. Outsourcing mundane  
and repetitive tasks to habits, managed by 
the toddler, allows your brain to easily  
manage your daily life, while dealing with more 
complex mental challenges at the same time.
So if we want to change and introduce 
a new behavior into our lives,  
we can actually use these energy 
saving mechanisms to make it easier.
We will focus on small things, not big ones.  
Improving your life a little is 
so much better than aiming high  
and changing nothing. Especially because small 
changes can do a lot over months and years.
How To Build a Habit
If you want to make change easier, 
the best way may not be to force  
it with willpower but to convince your 
brain that it’s not that big of a deal.  
By creating new routines and then turning 
them into habits. You want your wise planner  
to construct that first trail and then use your 
toddler to help initiate the action effortlessly.
Let us say, you want to work out 
to be fitter, a very common goal.  
The first thing to do is to break down this 
pretty vague goal into clear, separate actions,  
because the idea is to make the action 
itself as easy a threshold as possible:  
so small it is manageable and so specific 
that you don’t have to think about it a lot.
For example, a tangible, 
controllable action might be  
“doing ten squats” every morning. So you 
can start by trying to create a routine  
but already include clear triggers 
that the toddler can pick up later on.
Remember, a trigger is nothing more than a 
signal that you always associate with the action.  
They can be visual pointers like seeing 
a particular object, like your training  
outfit. Or a certain time of day, or a designated 
place like a nearby park – or even better, all of  
these things combined. The important thing is that 
you always start doing your action in a specific  
context. This trigger is the start button that 
will eventually set off the action automatically.
So to establish a home workout habit with ten 
squats to begin with, you could make sure to  
always do them with your exercise gear on, at the 
same place and time, like in your living room at  
8am. Once you have your trigger and action, 
all you need to do is repeat them regularly,  
ideally every day. If you keep going, they 
will change from a routine to a habit,  
from a trail to a highway. Don’t get this wrong, 
the squats will still take you energy to do – but  
the decision to do them will feel much less like 
a chore and more like a regular part of your day.
While this is simple, it is not easy.
Many things you want to turn into habits don’t 
offer as much instant gratification as wasting  
time on reddit. To make your new action easier 
to repeat and more likely to be picked up by  
the toddler, try to make it pleasurable. 
Not necessarily by rewarding yourself  
after you did it, but by making the action 
or behavior itself more enjoyable. Like only  
listening to your favorite podcast while 
working out, or chipping away at your taxes  
while you wait for civilization to load the next 
round. You need to figure out what works for you.
In principle, that's it.
Frustratingly simple, like most things you can 
do to make your life better. How long it takes  
for your toddler to take over and establish a 
habit varies widely. It depends on the behavior  
you are trying to get used to, what kind of person 
you are, your stress levels and many more things.  
It takes anything between 15 and 250 
days until a new habit is kicked off  
automatically by its trigger. You won't 
know how long it will take for you.
Starting is the easy part, 
especially in the first week or two.  
Continuing to do it every day is the hard 
part. But it does get easier as you keep going.
There are no silver bullets for 
change. But the science of habits  
is a reminder that it is possible, 
no matter how old or young you are.  
Even if you only end up doing a little more good 
stuff or a few new things, that’s still a success.  
Being a little bit more healthy or knowledgable 
is a million times better than being unhappy about  
a thing and changing nothing. In the end, 
change is a direction, not a destination.
So now that we hopefully gave you a bit 
of insight and motivation, this is the  
moment to sell you a thing! But please know, you 
do not need to buy anything to work on yourself.
Having said that, we struggle with 
change as much as anyone else,  
so we created our own habit journal, as much for 
ourselves as for you. Before we printed anything,  
we tested it on ourselves and got 
feedback from the Kurzgesagt team.
The idea is for you to track your habit 
progress for your desired behavior.  
There is a tutorial part which guides you through 
the hardest part of the process step by step.  
You’ll get helpful pointers, reflect on your 
progress and how you could make things easier for  
yourself. Once you get through the tutorial part 
the habit journaling starts, regularly interwoven  
by examples, science Breaks and reflections that 
will hopefully keep the journey interesting.
Like our Gratitude Journal it is cloth-bound, 
with an embossed hardcover and printed on  
high-quality paper. Nice to the touch and 
with lots of beautiful illustrations this  
book is compangion on your personal change 
journey, however small or big it may be.
Getting things from our shop is 
the best way to support Kurzgesagt  
and what we try to do here on the 
channel. Thank you for watching.
Look around you. Where are you? Where is this 
place you are occupying? Somewhere in a room,  
maybe in a city on a continent on a planet 
orbiting a star in a galaxy among billions.  
But… where is all of that? While 
this may feel like a daft question,  
it turns out that the concept of an absolute 
position is something humans made up.
In a nutshell, the universe is a big 
bag of space that has things in it.  
If someone removed all these things, the 
stars and planets and black holes and dust,  
there would just be empty space left. 
In empty space, the concept of having  
a position loses all meaning. Empty 
space is uniform, the same everywhere.
The space we occupy is not like a stage under 
our feet. We can't mark specific points,  
or staple something to spacetime as an 
anchor. Without things there is no position.  
We are really ever only at a position 
in relation to something else.  
Which also means that things we take for granted, 
like up and down are actually relative too.
Ok, let us fill the universe up with things again  
and try to find out where you are, 
right now. Relative to everything else.
Let us start this video at a familiar place 
and then get increasingly weird. From your  
perspective the world is seemingly flat and you 
can move in 3 dimensions. It's what physicists  
call a 'frame of reference' - the perspective 
you have of the universe and how you see things  
moving around you. Where your up and down 
is. Your frame of reference is correct.  
For you – but not for the rest of the universe.
Around 5 kilometers from you, where the horizon 
begins, the ground noticeably curves away from  
you. If you could see through the ground, 
you’d see people from below or sideways.  
But they don't fall 'down' off the planet 
because gravity doesn't actually pull them down.  
'Down' is an illusion of your reference frame. To 
earth's reference frame, gravity just pulls in.
But for humans there is an up and down because 
within our frame of reference that just makes  
sense. Which is also why we think that the planet 
itself has an up and down, north and south. And  
we made our maps accordingly. But an observer 
looking at the solar system might disagree.  
Our maps make sense to us because we are 
used to them, not because they are correct.
Ok. So this is step one – your position 
on what feels like a flat surface but  
is actually a sphere. But this sphere is 
always moving, never staying in one position.  
Earth is orbiting a star, the sun 
at the center of the solar system.
While we usually imagine this as pretty orderly,  
someone looking at us from the outside 
would see something pretty messy.  
To see this more clearly we’ll exaggerate 
all these movements, this is not to scale.
First of all, our orbit really is an ellipse, 
so we spend half the year sinking a little  
bit closer to the sun speeding up, and half 
the year rising up a bit and slowing down.  
And the ellipsis itself changes 
its shape every 100,000 years too.
And in another cycle of 112,000 years, the 
ellipse itself is drifting – which at least  
creates a beautiful shape. In the end, we 
get an orbital path that looks like a wobbly  
circle with wavy edges. And it gets worse, as 
the moon now starts to screw things up too.
As the moon is a pretty massive thing, it pulls on 
earth. Both objects orbit their common center of  
gravity, that lies around 4700 km off to the 
side of Earth’s core. In practice this means  
that as the moon orbits earth, it is jerking 
earth around a bit, enough to make it jiggle.
Ok so you are standing on the 
surface of a rotating planet,  
that is jiggling around the sun in an 
elliptical orbit that changes a bit every year.
But who's to say the earth is right? From  
the perspective of the sun the plane 
of the solar system is arbitrary,  
it's defined as the plane the earth orbits in 
because that is convenient for us. In reality  
the other planets are just a little 
bit inclined with respect to our plane.  
From their point of view, we're the 
ones with a slightly bent orbit.
But this is not it – far from it! The solar system 
as a whole is orbiting the center of the milky  
way galaxy. If we look at the milky way, we can 
clearly make out a galactic plane in which the  
solar system orbits the center every 230 million 
years. But of course it is not that simple.
First of all, the plane of the solar system 
is not aligned with the plane of the galaxy.  
Nothing really is – just like the planets in the 
solar system orbit the sun on their own planes, so  
do all the stars orbiting the galactic center. The 
solar system as a whole is tilted about 60 degrees  
towards the galactic plane, speeding through 
space at almost a million kilometers per hour.
Someone in the center of the galaxy would see 
the orbits of the planets moving through space  
in a helix shape, which you can 
imagine as a corkscrew motion,  
on the tilted plane of the solar system, 
relative to the plane of the galaxy.
This orientation in space means that sometimes the  
planets are sort of in front of the sun 
as it orbits around the galactic core.  
Let us just look at this for a moment 
– there is a strange and eerie beauty  
abouthow our planets and the sun move through 
space. Do you feel a bit dizzy? It gets worse.
This is still not the whole story because the 
mass of the galactic disk is constantly pulling on  
the solar system too. Like a drunk dolphin, we're 
diving down and shooting up hundreds of lightyears  
through the galactic plane, ten times every 
orbit, along arcs thousands of light years long.  
We haven’t mapped this motion out 
completely, as it takes the solar  
system tens of millions of years to go up and 
back once; and, well, humanity is not that old.
Let’s look at your relative 
position again. On a planet,  
tilted towards the sun, jiggled around by 
the moon. In a solar system tilted towards  
the galactic plane, moving forward in a helical 
shape, diving up and down through the plane.
Hm. But where is “up” in a galaxy? At this point 
the frame of reference becomes a bit arbitrary  
and pointless because of the nature of the 
universe at this scale. The Milky way is  
part of a galaxy group that appears to be part of 
greater structures like the Laniakea Supercluster,  
which itself is part of the gigantic Pisces–Cetus 
Supercluster Complex and finally a galactic  
filament that spans hundreds of millions of 
lightyears in all directions and orientations.
Someone looking right at us from that far 
away will only see the End of Greatness.  
All stuff appears homogeneous, the same 
everywhere. Just like with empty space,  
when everything looks the same, who's to say 
anyone's view is better than anyone else's?
We have reached the end of our 
little exercise in cosmic humility.  
Let us make the journey backwards again. From 
the indescribably large, to the really large,  
to our galactic home, to our galaxy, to the solar 
system diving up and down through the milky way,  
to the jiggle of existence. And finally, 
back to you, right now, watching this video.
If this is all a bit much, don’t feel bad. 
The scale of the universe is brain crushing  
and trying to keep track of how everything is 
oriented or decide where the best up and down is,  
is hard. But it doesn't really matter. 
Because it doesn't change where you are.  
You're already in the best spot you could possibly 
be – right here, right now. For all you care  
nothing can stop you from being right at 
the center of your own little universe.
Perspective really is everything. That is true 
for the universe we all inhabit, but even more  
so within your personal universe. The way your 
life will unfold also depends on what you consider  
possible. Take us at Kurzgesagt: our passion is 
to spark curiosity for science and make videos for  
free. But this is not a great business model so we 
began to create our own lines of science posters,  
calendars and fun kurzgesagt merch - pieces of 
Kurzgesagt - that you can take home and touch.
And we are doing this with Shopify, who 
also were so kind as to sponsor this  
video – which delighted us because we have 
been using their platform for years now.  
Shopify is an e-commerce platform that 
allows you to start and grow your business.  
And by starting a business, we really do mean 
from scratch: if you want to sell your handmade  
ceramic mugs out of your bedroom today, you can. 
But not just that – if you want to scale your  
one-man show to a sizeable team, then Shopify 
has the tools to support you on your journey.  
Now you just have to get started: go to 
shopify.com/kurzgesagt to get a free 14 day trial.
If you think that this does not apply to you and 
your ideas are too small, we want to encourage you  
to think again: the first video on this channel 
was a university project and Kurzgesagt itself  
was a creative outlet. Eventually we grew 
into a business and the team that is making  
videos for you today. And all of that just 
because we wanted to try out something new.
This is exactly the sort of thing 
that Shopify is determined to support  
and you can build your own thing with it. After 
all, whetheryour idea is still just a dream or  
might turn into a plan today is also just a matter 
of perspective. Millions of businesses in over 175  
countries are currently using Shopify to sell 
their products and we are one of them. Thanks  
to them for helping us get here and thanks to 
all of you for making our channel possible.
A war has been going on for billions of years 
that breeds well armed monsters, who struggle with  
other monsters for survival. Having no particular 
interest in us, most of them are relatively  
harmless, as our immune systems deal with 
their weapons easily. But there are exceptions.
Naegleria fowleri is an amoeba 
that has not only developed a  
deadly taste for human brains but is also a 
match for our defences and stars in dramatic  
headlines. What happens when 
this monster enters your body?
Naegleria fowleri is an amoeba, a microbe with a 
nucleus, one of the smallest lifeforms on earth.  
It is a voracious hunter of bacteria and other 
critters that it devours whole and rips into  
pieces. Like many amoebea it is able to transform 
into different stages that help it survive,  
but most of the time Naegleria 
fowleri is in its trophozoite stage,  
during which it looks like a squishy blob 
with tiny arms and hunts, divides and thrives.
Its natural home is in fresh water: ponds, 
rivers, lakes and hot springs. But unfortunately  
it also feels happy in pipes, swimming pools, 
fountains or spas when they are not properly  
treated. The warmer the water, the more it thrives 
and multiplies. So in the summer, when humans seek  
to cool off and enjoy themselves, the chances 
are highest that both species will interact.
Because this makes it hard to avoid, millions of 
people regularly have contact with the amoeba,  
especially in warmer climates, and many people 
even seem to have antibodies against it.  
And this is mostly ok, you can even 
swallow it without consequences.
Things turn bad when people dive or swim in water 
contaminated with the amoeba and water splashes  
high up into their noses. In a single drop 
of lake water there are millions of viruses,  
bacteria and amoebea and that isn’t really a big 
deal. But Naegleria fowleri is different. Let  
us zoom into the nose of an unsuspecting victim 
enjoying a great summer day and see what happens.
First of all, the amoeba doesn’t 
really want to be inside your nose  
as it is not really looking for trouble, 
it just wants to eat a few bacteria.  
Instead it is greeted by your natural defenses. 
Unfortunately for humans, Naegleria fowleri  
happens to be exceptionally good at generally 
flying under the radar of your immune system.  
For example, the inside of your nose is covered 
by mucosa, a slime filled with chemicals that  
kill or stun possible invaders or alert immune 
cells. But Naegleria fowleri is not particularly  
bothered by them and instead calmly checks out the 
scenery, mildly annoyed about the whole ordeal.
Now, if you are unlucky, the tiny 
critter stumbles over something  
that actually sparks its interest: Nerve cells.
Your nose is filled with a large 
network of olfactory nerve cells  
that pick up molecules from the outside and 
transmit their information to your olfactory bulb,  
the center of smell in your brain. To do 
their job these cells talk to each other by  
releasing various messenger chemicals and 
recognizing them via specific receptors.  
One of the most important of 
these chemicals is acetylcholine.
Through sheer evolutionary bad 
luck, Naegleria fowleri happens to  
have receptors that recognize acetylcholine.  
And it seems to attract them irresistibly, a 
little like moths that are attracted by light.
So as your olfactory nerve cells do their job, 
using plenty of acetylcholine to talk to the  
brain, Naegleria fowleri enters your tissue. It 
seems to follow the chemical signals upstream.  
Neutrophils, crazy suicide warriors begin to 
attack the amoebae. Individually they have no  
chance against them as the invaders are large and 
pretty buff fighters, used to dealing with tough  
enemies. So the defenders swarm the intruders 
and kill them either by vomiting chemicals  
that punch holes into them or by literally 
ripping parts of them off and devouring them.  
But the Naegleria fowleri train is still on track 
and while the Neutrophil attacks slow them down,  
they continue to follow the olfactory 
nerves to their final destination:
Your brain.
This process can take between one and nine days  
and you’ll probably not notice 
anything during that time.  
Until the amoebae reach the olfactory bulb, the 
center of smell and entrance to your brain. Your  
brain cells are nothing more than helpless victims 
and they all release that wonderful acetylcholine.
Naegleria fowleri initiates a massacre and 
releases an onslaught of various attack molecules.  
Some of them are basically little bombs 
that rip holes into your cells on contact  
so their pieces can be eagerly 
consumed. But Naegleria fowleri  
is now multiplying - and it's also becoming 
really creepy. In a feeding frenzy it can  
develop up to a dozen suckers called food cups, 
that look like giant eerie mouths. The amoebae  
engage your brain cells, suck them in and 
rip large “bites” out of them while they  
are still alive. Now things escalate quickly 
and the disease that will kill you sets in.
Alerted by the massacre, millions 
of immune cells, Neutrophils,  
Eosinophils and microglias invade the 
infected tissue. Which is a problem:  
your immune system is dangerous and not 
exactly a careful fighter. It's like  
burning down a forest to kill the wolves 
inside it. A really bad idea in the brain.
They waste no time and attack the amoeba, 
using all the weapons available to them,  
from chemicals to trying to eat them 
alive. Neutrophils explode themselves  
to erect barriers spiked with deadly 
chemicals. A fierce battle ensues.  
Naegleria fowleri can actually fight back, 
itself attacking and killing many immune cells.
The immune system now throws everything it has at 
the invader but in vain. The complement system,  
tiny protein bombs that can kill intruders on 
their own, are easily disabled. Antibodies,  
usually one of your superweapons, are just 
destroyed or swallowed. A high fever that  
usually slows enemies down does nothing, 
as the amoeba actually thrives in the heat.  
All the while the amoebae continue to 
multiply, fight and devour your brain cells.
A disastrous chain reaction is taking place.  
One major thing your immune cells do when 
they fight is to cause inflammation. Which  
directs large amounts of fluid from your 
bloodstream into the site of an infection.  
So as the battle rages on without a clear 
winner, more and more fluid enters the brain.
At this point the human will feel 
symptoms that quickly escalate.  
It all begins pretty vaguely, a headache, fever,  
nausea and vomiting. As the battle spreads 
rapidly through the brain serious symptoms appear,  
from confusion, inability to concentrate 
to fatigue, seizures and hallucinations.  
The brain swells up massively but can’t expand due 
to the bones surrounding it. So it compresses and  
disables the brainstem that controls things like 
breathing. Usually within a week the patient dies.
Up to 97% of patients infected by the 
amoeba share this fate. In almost all cases,  
by the time an infection by Naegleria fowleri is 
recognized the disastrous battle for the brain  
is already so far along that there is almost 
nothing to be done. Not only do we currently  
not have effective treatments, there are also an 
abundance of open questions about how an amoeba  
that usually enjoys its life in open water, is 
able to overcome our immune system so effectively.
So how worried do you need to be about this 
horrifying killer amoeba? Well, not very. While  
the Naegleria fowleri is clearly extremely deadly 
and the infection truly horrible, there have only  
been a few hundred cases in the last few decades. 
You are way more likely to drown in a pool than  
to get infected. Not only does the amoeba need 
to be flushed high up your nose, it also needs  
to get a good grip and it also has to make its 
way through the first lines of your defences.
Ultimately Naegleria fowleri is neither evil 
nor a huge public health risk. But every year  
some unlucky people have to deal with it. We still 
have so much to learn about it and until we find a  
way to treat it, Naegleria fowleri will continue 
to be this vague and horrifying thing, hunting  
in puddles and lakes and sometimes pools. Usually 
for bacteria. And very occasionally, for people.
- Oh hey, who are you?
It is me, your existential dread!
- Uhm, ok.
I'm here to make you question your own 
existence and everything you hold dear in life!
- Could you not please.
Tooooooo late, just look at all these amazing 
posters FULL of humbling visualisations like the  
scale of the universe. LOOK! How huge it is and 
how small you are! Look at the education edition,  
how it dives deep into the history of evolution or 
all these other scientific fields to make you feel  
bad for all the stuff you don't know! Or 
look at this one, IT GLOWS IN THE DARK!
- But Dread, these do make me feel good 
actually! They do fill me with excitement  
and awe about how amazing our universe is and 
I love learning! And look how pretty they are!
Nooooooooo, I can't persist in 
the presence of awe. Graglgrglglg.
If you too want to overcome your existential 
dread, make your life beautiful and also support  
Kurzgesagt so we can put thousands of hours 
into our videos and release them for free,  
you can get these and many many 
more amazing posters or shirts or  
so many more things in our shop. We put as 
much care into our products as into our videos,  
trying to find something clever or a new angle 
that will challenge your perspective while still  
teaching you the core aspects. It’s the best 
way to support what we do on this channel.
our home is burning
rapid climate change is destabilizing
our world it seems our emissions will
not fall quickly enough to avoid runaway
warming and we may soon hit tipping
points that will lead to the collapse of
ecosystems and our civilization
while scientists activists and much of
the younger generation urge action it
appears most politicians are not
committed to doing anything meaningful
while the fossil fuel industry still
works actively against change
it seems humanity can't overcome its
greed and obsession with short-term
profit and personal gain to save itself
and so for many the future looks grim
and hopeless
young people feel particularly anxious
and depressed instead of looking ahead
to a lifetime of opportunity they wonder
if they will even have a future or if
they should bring kids into this world
it's an age of doom and hopelessness and
giving up seems the only sensible thing
to do
but
that's not true
you are not doomed humanity is not
doomed
[Music]
despite the seriousness of the situation
for years positive trends have
accumulated and there is finally some
good news and a clear path towards our
collective climate goals welcome to our
ted talk please watch this video to the
end check out our detailed sources
afterwards to learn more
okay let's start with the scariest
things
cancelling the apocalypse
some of the most widely shared stories
about climate change are that it is an
existential threat the end of human
civilization and maybe even our own
extinction event
and that it's basically unavoidable now
but what does science actually say
as of 2022 the global average
temperature has risen 1.2 degrees
celsius compared to pre-industrial times
limiting warming to 1.5 degrees was the
most ambitious goal of the paris
agreement but we are not likely to meet
it
already with the warming we have today
hot places will get hotter wet places
wetter and the risk and strength of
extreme weather events increase
significantly
warming beyond two degrees makes all of
these extremes more extreme extreme
weather events more common with more
ecosystems under major pressure
some will not survive
at three degrees significant parts of
earth especially in developing countries
might become unable to feed their
populations
heat waves will become a major global
issue
large-scale natural systems will break
down the scale and frequency of
hurricanes fires and droughts will
further increase and cause trillions in
damage
poor regions and subsistence farmers
will be hit the hardest
hundreds of millions of people will need
to leave their homes
in the four to eight degree range the
apocalypse begins the hot house earth
where things change so quickly that it
may become unable to support our large
human population and billions may perish
leaving the rest on a hostile alien
planet
a decade ago for lack of action and
perspective many scientists assumed a
four plus degree world was our future
and a lot of public communication
focused on exactly this future path
luckily it's much less likely that this
version of the apocalypse will come to
pass
if current climate policies stagnate
we're likely to end up with warming of
around three degrees celsius by 2100
which is scary and tragic and far from
acceptable
but this is actually good news
how
in the last decade we've seen enough
progress that most scientists now think
that we have likely avoided apocalyptic
climate change
although substantial risk still remains
we can pretty confidently say that
humanity isn't going anywhere
civilization might have to change
but it will endure
which begs the question
what has changed over the last 10 years
and is this really good news
the invisible shift
you probably know this story the last
decade has been an immense failure for
climate policies around the world
instead of passing comprehensive binding
bills that would meaningfully reduce
emissions we mostly did nothing a lost
decade with one negative record after
another and this story is true and it's
one reason why so many people are giving
up but it is not the whole picture
despite the lack of climate policies and
ongoing lobbying and misinformation
campaigns from the fossil fuel
industries there was a lot of progress
let's go back 20 years to see why today
is so different
between 2000 and 2010 greenhouse gas
emissions had grown by 24 percent three
times as much as the increase in the
previous decade
subsidies for fossil fuels aimed at
promoting economic growth caused a
colossal increase in their consumption
for developing countries like china and
india coral was the cheapest fuel for
growth while rich countries showed
little interest in changing their ways
in 2010 many people expected these
trends to continue instead of decreasing
fossil fuel use its consumption would
rise
the next decade turned out to be very
different though
first of all coal burning in developing
countries like india has slowed down or
leveled off like in china and it's
plummeted in rich countries like the uk
and us
since 2015 three quarters of planned
coal plants have been cancelled and 44
countries have committed to stop
building them
ten years ago that would have seemed
like wishful thinking but today we can
say with confidence coal is dying it's
just not competitive anymore because
technologies we thought would remain
expensive matured rapidly instead
renewable electricity has shown
explosive progress
in a mere decade wind energy got three
times cheaper
solar electricity is now 10 times
cheaper
cheaper than coal or any other fossil
fuel burning power plant despite the
massive subsidies and global
infrastructure propping up fossil fuels
25 times more solar and nearly five
times more wind electricity is produced
today compared with 10 years ago which
is of course not nearly enough
one of the biggest obstacles is the
variability of their power output
renewables need a lot of energy storage
to be a reliable power source like
expensive batteries
amazingly battery prices have decreased
by 97 in the past 30 years 60 in the
last decade alone which will serve all
kinds of green technology like electric
cars
you might say well that's great but
didn't kotskazak's last climate video
say that while wind and solar are nice
we need nothing less than a fundamental
transition of our global industrial
system
yes but luckily the shift goes beyond
just the energy sector throughout the
economy people are working on improving
current technology to lower emissions
we're rapidly replacing old incandescent
light bulbs with leds that are 10 times
more efficient
in 2020 about seven out of ten new cars
in norway were electric or hybrid in
2021 it was already eight out of ten
and the list goes on from electric
heating and better insulation to ships
traveling at half speed to save fuel
wherever you look you find scientists
engineers and entrepreneurs trying to
solve some aspect of climate change
enormous amounts of human ingenuity are
being brought to bear on this problem
with more and more people deciding to
prioritize preventing rapid climate
change
solutions for low carbon production of
cement electronics and steel and
innovations like artificial meat and
carbon capture are in the works
the more of these technologies we deploy
the cheaper new and better technology
gets
the cheaper they get the more people use
them and so on we can see the impact
already the domestic co2 output of rich
countries is falling without a major
recession
since the year 2000 the eu as a whole
shows a 21 decrease at least 28
the uk 35
denmark 43
but the best news may be that emissions
are no longer necessarily coupled with
economic growth
in the past this was an inconvenient
truth to get richer you had to emit more
which led to fierce arguments between
developing and developed countries about
the fairness of reducing emissions while
their populations were still poor but in
the last decade we've seen that it is
possible to increase prosperity without
increasing emissions emissions in the
czech republic dropped 13 percent while
their gdp grew by 27
france reduced their co2 emissions by 14
while increasing gdp by 15 percent
romania saw an 8 decrease and 35 percent
growth
and even the largest economy on earth
the usa decreased emissions by 4
while growing their gdp by 26
some of you may call this a numbers
trick
that rich countries are just exporting
emissions to poorer nations by moving
the dirty parts of their economies like
manufacturing but even when we account
for all of our imported goods the
numbers still look positive
it's no longer a matter of having to
choose between prosperity and the
climate as it seemed to be a decade ago
developing countries will profit from
that because as rich countries pay for
the expensive development of green
technologies they can adopt them more
cheaply they can skip most of the higher
mission phase that today's rich
countries went through
we are at the point where not
decarbonizing is a bad business decision
and we haven't even really talked about
solutions like carbon capture
in 2000 it didn't really exist
in 2022 that technology does exist and
costs around 600 to remove one tonne of
co2 from the atmosphere
as investment pours in and the
technology matures and begins to scale
it's likely that these costs will
plummet over the next few decades
so everything's fine then
well let's not get carried away all of
these processes are great but not nearly
fast enough we're still doing way too
little and technology will not magically
solve everything we need to use fewer
resources and use them longer design
consumer goods that are repairable and
durable and decrease our energy
requirements
we need much better infrastructure
agriculture and cities it will still be
hard work especially to get the right
policies passed and enacted but for the
first time ever there are a few trend
lines pointing solidly in the right
direction and now imagine if all of this
was achieved without proper financial
and political support and despite fossil
fuel lobbying just think what humanity
can do when climate change finally gets
the political attention and funding it
needs so is it okay to feel hopeful
again the situation is still dire and
serious so what's the point of focusing
on this side of the story
the trap of hopelessness
climate change can feel overwhelming and
make your future seem bleak
the sadness and hopelessness that many
people feel is real and very destructive
because it causes apathy apathy that is
only serving the fossil fuel industry
that is still delaying change however it
can in a sense they have weaponized
hopelessness
we are now in phase four in the public
debate about rapid climate change action
phase one was climate change is not real
phase two was climate change is real but
not caused by humans phase three was
climate change may be caused by humans
but it's not that bad
phase four is climate change is no
longer avoidable
we are doomed and it doesn't matter what
we do
if we want the world to change we first
need to believe that change is possible
and we have an abundance of evidence
that it is
changes to our industrial system are
gaining momentum technology gets better
and cheaper climate change has become a
key issue in most free elections
as more and more younger people move
into influential positions they
prioritize climate change and work on
new solutions
in 2022 most governments not only
acknowledge it but set their own net
zero goals in democratic and autocratic
countries
the results of years of fighting a steep
uphill battle are now clearly visible
the pressure needs to keep increasing to
make sure that the promises made today
are actually kept
climate dumerism is the equivalent of
giving up even though you can still
prevent not just the worst case but also
mitigate most of the bad things make
changes in time to adapt better and
prevent the poorest from suffering
that is why hopelessness and apathy are
so dangerous
if the last in many ways wasted decade
has shown anything then it's that
progress is being made and the dire
scenarios are just predictions not our
sealed fate as of 2022 based on current
global policies we will end up in a
three degrees world
now it's our job to yet again prove the
predictions wrong despite how serious
and urgent things are to turn that three
degrees into a two degrees and then see
where we can go from there for that we
need hope
and we hope we gave you that today at
least a little that you feel that things
are serious but also that you have a
future that you can have kids without
dooming them or the world
that taking action today is worth it
and that despite powerful industries
doing everything to delay it society is
changing
if you need a more concrete roadmap of
what you can do personally we're working
on a follow-up video to talk about that
in greater detail
dumarism inactivity and weaponized
hopelessness are the only trump cards
left for the powers that don't want
change
don't let them win
we're still excited about the future
and we think one of the best things you
can do to keep your optimism and
curiosity up is to learn new things
if you don't know where to start our
friends from brilliant.org have got you
covered brilliant makes maths and
science accessible and fun with a
hands-on approach
more than 60 interactive courses like
the joy of problem solving or scientific
thinking give you the tools to crack
problems in maths science and computer
science that are all designed to get
your intuition going and give you plenty
of aha experiences
lessons will surprise you with
storytelling code writing tasks and
interactive challenges basically using
whatever keeps you interested and
entertained
all the content is interactive instead
of just reading and listening to
explanations you drag and drop
manipulate shapes and diagrams make
selections and answer questions
this way you learn something almost
without you noticing it
and tiny step by step you'll build up
your long-term understanding of science
and get closer to your stem goals
to start looking at the world of science
from a different perspective go to
brilliant.org slash nutshell and sign up
for free
and there's an extra perk for
kurtzgazzak viewers the first 200 people
to use the link get 20 percent off their
annual membership which unlocks all of
brilliant's courses in maths science and
computer science at courts and we love
to create things that seem impossible at
first
brilliant can help you acquire the
skills to do that
[Music]
wait
[Music]
you
When we think about alien civilizations we 
tend to look into the vastness of space,  
to far away planets. But there is another  
incredibly vast dimension that we might 
be giving too little thought to: time.
Could it be that over the last 
hundreds of millions of years,  
other civilizations existed on earth? 
Indigenous technological species that  
rose and died out? And that they or 
their artifacts are buried beneath  
our feet? What does science have to say about 
this and what are the implications for us?
Life on earth has existed for 4 billion 
years, mostly as single celled organisms  
until some 540 million years ago the Cambrian 
explosion heralded the age of animals. A huge  
time window for our indigenous aliens. Where would 
we look for them and what could we hope to find?  
Sadly we have only one 
civilization to look at: Ourselves.
Anatomically modern humans emerged around 
300,000 years ago and probably lived in small  
groups of hunter gatherers, slowly spreading 
around the world. Progress was slow and our  
lifestyle did not change much, although there 
may have been local bursts of complexity.
Until about 10,000 years ago, when 
the agricultural revolution changed  
our lifestyle forever, enabling massive 
population growth and technological progress.  
Rather than just animals with culture and tools 
that would have been invisible from space,  
we changed the face of the 
planet, cleared forests and  
constructed cities and temples for our 
gods at breathtaking speeds and scales.
Until about 300 years ago, we became 
an industrial species and yet again  
our numbers grew exponentially 
as did our impact on the planet.
We could say that our 300,000 year 
long history has three phases:  
We were hunter gatherers for 97%, farmers for 
2.9% and industrialists for 0.1% of our history.
And yet we are super new on earth.  
On geological timescales, even the sturdiest 
things lose their durability. The oldest large  
scale surface is in the Negev Desert, a meager 
1.8 million years old. Everything older has been  
crushed to dust or turned over and it is either 
below the ground, or covered by ice or ocean.  
Our age, the Anthropocene will be a layer only 
a few centimeters thick in a few million years.
If there were aliens before us and they 
too went through these three phases,  
what would remain of them? What can we learn 
about indegnous aliens by looking at ourselves?
Hunter & Gatherer Aliens
We actually know that in the last few million 
years, there were hunter gatherers aliens.  
Our ancestors like Homo Erectus and cousins like 
the Neanderthals or Denisovans and probably many  
more that we haven’t found yet or are lost to 
time forever. They left fragments of their bodies,  
of weapons and tools and even art. Considering how 
long they existed and how little remains of them,  
although they lived not that far from our present 
it is easy to think there have been others.
Intelligent animals like us that could talk and 
use tools and fire, that had culture and art. For  
the last two million years, most hominins lived as 
hunter-gatherers – so if these aliens never moved  
up higher on the tech tree, hundreds of different 
species and cultures could have existed without  
leaving any traces. Their artifacts lost to 
biological and then geological processes.  
At worst they would leave absolutely nothing 
to be found after thousands of years.
But what about fossils? We talked about how 
unlikely the process of fossilization is in more  
detail in our dinosaur video, but in a nutshell, 
per hundred thousand years of earth's history  
we only get a handful of good fossils. So we might 
easily just miss fossils of such people – but even  
if we had any, we would not necessarily be 
able to identify them as hunter gatherers.
Agricultural and Empire Aliens
Looking at humans again, agricultural societies 
left much more to be dug up and found,  
because they used more sophisticated tools made 
from sturdier materials and had to feed millions,  
leaving many more artifacts. Farming 
allowed them to specialize and develop tech  
from writing to navigation, architecture 
and government. Over thousands of years city  
states became kingdoms and empires, some 
existing for millennia before they fell.
Many of the buildings or monuments 
they constructed are still around  
and traces of them will exist for a few thousand 
more years. Some only as outlines in the ground,  
but still recognizable to future archaeologists. 
The pyramids are piles of limestone so massive  
that they will probably be around for hundreds 
of thousands of years. And because of the  
greater numbers of humans that lived during our 
farm and empire period, we can expect way more  
fossils and artifacts to be detectable, maybe 
for a few million years before they vanish.
So we can say with confidence that no such 
indigenous alien civilization existed in the  
last few million years because otherwise we 
would have found something that they left.
This still leaves a window of hundreds of millions 
of years, back to the emergence of complex life,  
where we would not be able to tell. If there were 
alien pre industrial societies and empires on the  
level of the ancient Romans or Chinese, they would 
have likely disappeared without a trace. Their  
tools, even advanced metals, would have rotted 
away. If they dug up canals, cleared forests and  
built cities, their traces would be very hard to 
distinguish from nature. Maybe there once was an  
empire of cephalopods occupying impressive cities 
in swamps and lakes, made from wood and stone.  
Their engineers flooding land to build wet cities, 
their poets reciting poems in a language of  
colors. Maybe they never industrialized – maybe 
their society was too stable or not inventive  
enough or they never got a chance. A single 
event like an asteroid, an epidemic or an ice age  
could just have deleted their civilization, 
ground up their temples as their soft bodies  
rotted away. Sadly we don’t have the tiniest 
amount of evidence for any such civilization.
After a few million years at best, their 
achievements would have dissolved into nothing.
Industrial Indigenous Aliens
What about industrial civilizations, 
like humanity today? Imagine humans  
died out suddenly, through a pandemic or cosmic 
rays or something like that. What would remain?
Our impact on the planet is orders of 
magnitude greater than that of our ancestors.  
The fossil record will show a 
great extinction of wildlife  
and an explosion of fossils from human associated 
animals, like rats, cows, pigs and chickens.  
Like the structures of our ancestors, skyscrapers 
and streets and harddrives will basically crumble  
into nothingness in a few millennia. But 
because there were so many humans everywhere,  
for a few million years after our sudden end, 
there would be clear hints of our existence.
The byproducts of our industrial lifestyle might  
actually give us away for some 
hundreds of millions of years .
We use massive amounts of artificial fertilizer 
which redirects earth’s flow of nitrogen that  
is being deposited in the soil. Mining metals 
and rare Earth elements leaves long term scars  
and depletes natural resources. We saturate 
our oceans with plastics that find their way  
to the ocean floor and may persist 
for hundreds of millions of years.  
There are radioactive elements and their decay, 
unnatural accumulations of elements that do not  
exist outside labs or weapons. And of course, in 
our short industrial history we have changed the  
proportion of CO2 in the air by burning massive 
amounts of fossil fuels, increasing the acidity  
of the oceans and so on. We may already 
have left a mark in the geological record.
So far we have found no traces of 
an industrial alien civilization.  
No layers of weird chemicals or displaced 
elements. No radioactive layer to indicate  
that once great nations waged nuclear 
war. We do see mass extinctions and  
massive shifts in the fossil records but no 
evidence that they did not occur naturally.
And ironically we’ve hit upon an interesting 
problem here: If industrial societies stress the  
ecosystem enough to cause their own extinction, 
they won’t be around that long. But if they become  
sustainable their imprint on the geological record 
may be tiny. If past industrial civilizations were  
sustainable before they died out, we may have 
little to no chance of ever knowing about them.
In any case, over hundreds of millions 
of years these signatures may become  
very subtle and get overlooked or interpreted as 
natural. Even if an industrialized alien society  
existed 200 million years ago and lasted 
for 100,000 years, 300 times longer than  
industrial humanity, it still might be 
easy to miss it in the geological record.
In any case, all of this is speculation. In 
the end we should not use our imagination to  
trick ourselves into thinking we know anything 
about our blind spots. Just assuming a thing  
happened because we don’t have evidence 
against it is a trap we should avoid.
So for now, if we look at the 
vastness of time it seems as  
devoid of aliens as the vastness of space. Maybe 
we are alone in this universe and always were.  
Maybe we’ll find traces of others eventually, we 
don’t know. But there is one important takeaway:  
The continuation of our civilization is 
not guaranteed and if we are not careful,  
we may disappear forever. Let’s 
hope that in a few million years,  
there won't be another civilization 
studying our layer in the fossil record.
It’s frustrating to know there are so 
many things in our past we can’t access.  
At least you can avoid that annoying feeling when 
it comes to other stuff you are interested in,  
like your favorite TV shows or movies. 
You can make this possible by going to  
NordVPN.com/kurzgesagt. NordVPNs service lets you 
change your virtual location by choosing from over  
5200 fast servers in 60 countries all over the 
world and access regionally blocked content or  
games that may not be available in your country.
Secure your internet traffic with top-tier  
NordVPN encryption, no matter if you’re 
using a Computer, Tablet or Smartphone.  
It’s compatible with every major platform 
and can be used on 6 devices at once. 
If you want to make the rest of 
your digital life airtight as well,  
NordVPN also offers the secure Password manager 
NordPass and encrypted cloud storage NordLocker. 
To explore all the games and shows you can get 
your hands on, go to NordVPN.com/kurzgesagt  
for an exclusive deal for our viewers. It’s risk 
free with NordVPN’s 30 day money back guarantee.
